
===== BOOK PAGE 1 =====

Kaamran Hafeez/The New Yorker Collection/The Cartoon Bank
Systems Analysis 
Fundamentals
PART
I


===== BOOK PAGE 2 =====

2
1 
CHAPTER
Systems, Roles, and 
Development Methodologies
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Once you have mastered the material in this chapter, you will be able to:
1 Understand the need for systems analysis and design in organizations.
2 Realize what the many roles of a systems analyst are.
3 Comprehend the fundamentals of the systems development life cycle (SDLC).
4 Understand the agile methodology for systems development.
5 Gain an appreciation for object-oriented systems design.
6 Understand the importance of cloud computing and the cloud development life cycle (CDLC).
7 Learn how to choose which systems development method to use.
8 Discover what open source software is and how it is developed.
Organizations have long recognized the importance of managing key resources such as people 
and raw materials. Information has now moved to its rightful place as a key resource. Decision 
makers understand that information is not just a by-product of conducting business; rather, it 
fuels business and can be the critical factor in determining the success or failure of a business.
To maximize the usefulness of information, a business must manage it correctly, 
just as it manages other resources. Managers need to understand that costs are associ-
ated with the production, distribution, security, storage, and retrieval of all information. 
Although information is all around us, it is not free, and its strategic use for positioning a 
business competitively should not be taken for granted.
The ready availability of networked computers, along with access to the Internet and 
the web, has created an information explosion throughout society in general and in busi-
ness in particular. Managing computer-generated information differs in significant ways 
from handling manually produced data. There is usually a greater quantity of computer 
information to administer. Costs of organizing and maintaining it can increase at alarming 
rates, and users often treat it less skeptically than information obtained in different ways. 
This chapter examines the fundamentals of different kinds of information systems, the 
varied roles of systems analysts, and the phases in the systems development life cycle 
(SDLC) as they relate to human–computer interaction (HCI) factors; choosing among alter-
natives to the SDLC such as the agile approach, object-oriented systems analysis and 
design, the cloud development life cycle; and participating in open source software devel-
opment. It also introduces computer-aided software engineering tools.


===== BOOK PAGE 3 =====

CHAPTER  1  •  S y S TEMS ,  Rol ES ,  A n D  D E v E lo PME n T  M ETH o D ologi ES     3
NEED FOR SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
Systems analysis and design, as performed by systems analysts, is used to understand what 
people need to be able to systematically analyze data input or data flow, process or transform 
data, store data, and output information in the context of a particular organization or enterprise. 
Systems analysts seek to identify and solve the right problems by performing a thorough analysis 
of the client’s system. Furthermore, systems analysis and design is used to analyze, design, and 
implement improvements to the computerized information systems that support users and the 
functions of businesses.
Security is critical to the functioning of organizational information systems, and security is 
a challenge for everyone involved in systems development. Information systems present multiple 
vulnerabilities, and the idea of perfect security is a fantasy. Rather, organizations make trade-offs, 
weighing the value of the data they are storing with the risk that they will experience a security 
breach. As a systems developer, it is important that you design new systems with an awareness 
of what you can do to design security into a system from the very beginning. Developing privacy 
controls and security by design, from the outset of systems design, is much more desirable and effec-
tive than adding it to older, legacy systems. Of course, you should always examine systems you are 
updating or improving for ways to address vulnerabilities and improve training for security issues.
Developing a system without proper planning leads to great user dissatisfaction and frequently 
causes the system to fall into disuse. Systems analysis and design lends structure to the analysis 
and design of information systems, a costly endeavor that might otherwise have been done in a 
haphazard way. It can be thought of as a series of processes systematically undertaken to improve 
a business by using computerized information systems. Systems analysis and design involves 
working with current and eventual users of information systems to support them in working with 
technologies in an organizational setting.
User involvement throughout a systems project is critical to the successful development of 
computerized information systems. Systems analysts, whose roles in the organization are dis-
cussed next, are the other essential component in developing useful information systems.
Users are moving to the forefront as software development teams become more international 
in their composition. This means that there is more emphasis on working with software users; 
on performing analysis of their business, problems, and objectives; and on communicating the 
analysis and design of the planned system to all involved.
In this video, the topic of delivering sensational service is explored 
in a humorous way. As implied in the video, as a systems analyst 
you need to care for your clients, ask clients what they need and 
be responsive to those needs, anticipate the clients’ needs (perhaps 
even surprise them), be efficient and take action. After you view the 
video, please reflect on the following questions:
1.
 Ho
w can you, as a systems analyst, gain the trust of your 
clients?
2.
 Ho
w can you communicate your enthusiasm about working 
with your clients in ways other than in words?
3.
 What are some of the mistak
es that the pet consultant in the 
video made in working with her client?
4.
 The systems analyst must be ethical. F
or example, you 
shouldn’t promise features of software that you may not 
deliver. What are other ethical standards that forming a 
relationship with a client might entail?
SYSTEMS SCENARIO  
Delivering Service to the Client
This chapter begins with the need for systems analysis, followed 
by a description of the roles of the systems analyst and the quali-
ties a systems analyst must possess to do their job successfully.  
To view the video for this scenario,  
see eText Chapter 1.
Seven Dimensions/Boclips


===== BOOK PAGE 4 =====

4    PART i •  S y STEMS AnAly SiS FUnDAMEnTAlS
ROLES OF A SYSTEMS ANALYST
A systems analyst systematically assesses how users interact with technology and how businesses 
function by examining the inputting and processing of data and the outputting of information with 
the intent of improving organization processes. Many improvements involve better support of 
users’ work tasks and business functions by using computerized information systems. This defini-
tion emphasizes a systematic, methodical approach to analyzing—and potentially improving—
what is occurring in the specific context experienced by users and created by a business.
Our definition of a systems analyst is necessarily broad. An analyst must be able to work with 
people of all descriptions and be experienced in working with computers. An analyst plays many 
roles, sometimes balancing several at the same time. The three primary roles of a systems analyst 
are consultant, supporting expert, and agent of change.
Systems Analyst as Consultant
A systems analyst frequently acts as a systems consultant to people and their businesses and, 
thus, may be hired specifically to address information systems issues within a business. Such 
hiring can be an advantage because outside consultants bring with them a fresh perspective that 
people in an organization do not possess. On the other hand, it also means that outside analysts are 
at a disadvantage because an outsider can never know the true organization culture or subcultures. 
presentations, drawing diagrams, or interviewing users. If they 
understand decision making, it will make their job easier. Also, 
Marathon is interested in integrating ecommerce into the entire busi-
ness. We need someone who at least grasps the strategic importance 
of the web; page design is such a small part of it.”
Ginger interjects again with a healthy dose of practicality, 
saying, “Leave that to management. I still say the new person should 
be a good coder.” Then she ponders aloud, “I wonder how important 
UML will be?”
After listening patiently to everyone’s wish list, one of the 
analysts who has worked for Marathon Vitamin Shops from 
the beginning, Kal Siem, speaks up, joking, “We’d better see if 
Superman is available!”
As the group shares a laugh, Al sees an opportunity to try for 
some consensus, saying, “We’ve had a chance to hear several dif-
ferent qualifications. Let’s each take a moment and make a list of 
the qualifications we personally think are essential for the new 
ecommerce development person to possess. We’ll share them and 
continue discussing until we can describe the person in enough 
detail to turn a description over to the human resources group 
for processing.”
What qualifications should the systems analysis team be 
looking for when hiring their new ecommerce development team 
member? Is it more important to know specific languages or to 
have an aptitude for picking up languages and software packages 
quickly? How important is it that the person being hired has some 
basic business understanding? Should all team members possess 
identical competencies and skills? What personality or character 
traits are desirable in a systems analyst who will be working in 
ecommerce development?
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 1.1 
Healthy Hiring: Ecommerce Help Wanted
“You’ll be happy to know that we made a strong case to man-
agement that we should hire a new systems analyst to specialize 
in ecommerce development,” says Al Falfa, a systems analyst for 
the multioutlet international chain Marathon Vitamin Shops. He 
is meeting with his large team of systems analysts to decide on 
the qualifications that their new team member should possess. Al 
continues, saying, “In fact, they were so excited by the possibility 
of our team helping to move Marathon into an ecommerce strategy 
that they’ve said we should start our search now and not wait until 
the fall.”
Ginger Rute, a senior analyst, agrees, saying, “The demand for 
website developers is still outstripping the supply. We should move 
quickly. I think our new person should be knowledgeable in system 
modeling, JavaScript, C++, Rational Rose, and be familiar with 
Ajax, just to name a few.”
Al looks surprised at Ginger’s long list of skills but then replies, 
“Well, that’s certainly one way we could go. But I would also like to 
see a person with some business savvy. Most of the people coming 
out of school will have solid coding skills, but they should know about 
accounting, inventory, and distribution of goods and services too.”
The newest member of the systems analysis group, Vita Minh, 
finally breaks into the discussion. She says, “One of the reasons  
I chose to come to work with all of you was that I thought we all got 
along quite well together. Because I had some other opportunities, I 
looked very carefully at what the atmosphere was here. From what 
I’ve seen, we’re a friendly group. Let’s be sure to hire someone who 
has a good personality and who fits in well with us.”
Al concurs, continuing, “Vita’s right. The new person should 
be able to communicate well with us, and with business clients 
too. We are always communicating in some way, through formal


===== BOOK PAGE 5 =====

CHAPTER 1  •  Sy STEMS , RolES , AnD  DEvEloPMEnT  METHoDologiES     5
As an outside consultant, you will rely heavily on the systematic methods discussed throughout 
this text to analyze and design appropriate information systems for users working in a particular 
business. In addition, you will rely on information systems users to help you understand the orga-
nizational culture and subcultures from others’ viewpoints.
Systems Analyst as Supporting Expert
Another role that you may be required to play is that of supporting expert within a business for 
which you are regularly employed in some systems capacity. In this role, an analyst draws on 
professional expertise concerning computer hardware and software and their uses in the business. 
This work is often not a full-blown systems project and may entail only a small modification or 
a decision affecting a single department.
As the supporting expert, you are not managing the project; you are merely serving as a 
resource for those who are managing it. If you are a systems analyst employed by a manufacturing 
or service organization, many of your daily activities may be encompassed by this role.
Systems Analyst as Agent of Change
The most comprehensive and responsible role that the systems analyst takes on is that of an agent 
of change, whether internal or external to the business. As an analyst, you are an agent of change 
whenever you perform any of the activities in the systems development life cycle (discussed in the 
next section) and are present and interacting with users and the business for an extended period 
(from two weeks to more than a year).
Your presence in the business changes it. As a systems analyst, you must recognize this fact 
and use it as a starting point for your analysis. Hence, you must interact with users and manage-
ment (if they are not one and the same) from the very beginning of your project. Without their 
help, you cannot understand what they need to support their work in the organization, and real 
change cannot take place.
Qualities of a Systems Analyst
From the foregoing descriptions of the roles the systems analyst plays, it is easy to see that a suc-
cessful systems analyst must possess a wide range of qualities. Above all, an analyst is a problem 
solver. They are people who view the analysis of problems as a challenge and who enjoy devising 
workable solutions. When necessary, an analyst must be able to systematically tackle the situation 
at hand through a skillful application of tools, techniques, and experience.
An analyst must also be a communicator capable of relating meaningfully to other people over 
extended periods of time. Systems analysts need to be able to understand humans’ needs when 
interacting with technology, and they need enough computer experience to code, understand the 
capabilities of computers, glean information requirements from users, and communicate what is 
needed to coders. Analysts also need to possess strong personal and professional ethics to help 
them shape their client relationships.
A systems analyst must be a self-disciplined, self-motivated individual who is able to manage 
and coordinate other people as well as innumerable project resources. Systems analysis is a 
demanding career, but, in compensation, it is an ever-changing and always challenging one.
THE SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT LIFE CYCLE
Throughout this chapter, we refer to the systematic approach analysts take to the analysis and 
design of information systems. Much of this is embodied in the three approaches we describe in 
this book. The first approach is called the systems development life cycle (SDLC). The SDLC 
is a phased approach to analysis and design processes based on the assumption that systems are 
best developed by using a specific cycle of analyst and user activities. It has also been called 
the waterfall method because the system analysis completes the first phase, then moves down 
to the next, and so on, like water flowing steadily downward from one rock to another. The Proj-
ect Management Institute (PMI) calls this a predictive life cycle with planned phases unfolding 
sequentially (2021). (In Chapter 3, you’ll learn more about project management and the PMI.)
Analysts disagree on exactly how many phases there are in the SDLC, but they generally laud 
its organized approach. Here we have divided the cycle into seven phases, as shown in Figure 1.1.


===== BOOK PAGE 6 =====

6    PART i •  S y STEMS AnAly SiS FUnDAMEnTAlS
Although each phase is presented discretely, it is never accomplished as a separate step. Instead, 
several activities may occur simultaneously, and activities may be repeated.
Identifying Problems, Opportunities, and Objectives
In this first phase of the SDLC, an analyst is concerned with correctly identifying problems, 
opportunities, and objectives. This stage is critical to the success of the rest of the project because 
no one wants to waste time addressing the wrong problem.
The first phase requires that the analyst look honestly at what is occurring in a business. Then, 
together with organization members, the analyst pinpoints problems. Others often bring up these 
problems, and they are the reason the analyst was initially called. Opportunities are situations 
that the analyst believes can be improved by using computerized information systems. Seizing 
opportunities may allow the business to gain a competitive edge or set an industry standard.
Identifying objectives is also an important component of the first phase. The analyst must 
first discover what the business is trying to do. Then the analyst will be able to see whether some 
aspect of information systems applications can help the business reach its objectives by addressing 
specific problems or opportunities.
The people involved in the first phase are the users, analysts, and systems managers coordi-
nating the project. In Chapter 3 we discuss them as stakeholders in the SDLC process. Activities 
in this phase consist of interviewing user management, summarizing the knowledge obtained, 
estimating the scope of the project, and documenting the results. The output of this phase is a 
feasibility report that contains a problem definition and summarizes the objectives. Management 
must then decide whether to proceed with the proposed project. If the user group does not have 
sufficient funds in its budget or if it wishes to tackle unrelated problems, or if the problems do not 
require a computer system, a different solution may be recommended, and the systems project 
does not proceed any further.
Determining Human Information Requirements
In the next phase, the analyst determines the human needs of the users involved, using a variety of 
tools to understand how users interact in the work context with their current information systems. 
The analyst uses interactive methods such as interviewing, sampling as well as investigating hard 
data, and using questionnaires; unobtrusive methods, such as observing decision makers’ behavior 
and their office environments; and all-encompassing methods, such as prototyping.
The analyst will use these methods to pose and answer many questions concerning human–
computer interaction (HCI), including questions such as, “What are the users’ physical strengths 
and limitations?” In other words, “What needs to be done to make the system audible, legible, and 
safe?” “How can the new system’s interfaces be designed to be easy to use, learn, and remember?” 
“How can the system be made pleasing or even fun to use?” and “How can the system support a 
user’s individual work tasks and make them more productive in new ways?”
In the information requirements phase of the SDLC, the analyst is striving to understand 
what information users need to perform their jobs. At this point, the analyst is examining how to 
FIGURE 1.1 
The seven phases of the systems 
development life cycle.
1
7
6 5
4
Developing and
documenting
software
3
2 Determining human
information
requirements
Analyzing
system needs
Designing the
recommended
system
Testing and
maintaining
the system
Implementing
and evaluating
the system
Identifying problems,
opportunities, and
objectives


===== BOOK PAGE 7 =====

CHAPTER 1  •  Sy STEMS , RolES , AnD  DEvEloPMEnT  METHoDologiES     7
make the system useful to the people involved. How can the system better support individual tasks 
that need to be done? What new tasks are enabled by the new system that users were unable to 
do without it? How can the new system extend a user’s capabilities beyond what the old system 
provided? How can the analyst create a system that is rewarding for workers to use?
The people involved in this phase are the analysts and users, typically operations managers 
and operations workers. The systems analyst needs to know the details of current system func-
tions: the who (the people who are involved), what (the business activity), where (the environ-
ment in which the work takes place), when (the timing), and how (how the current procedures 
are performed) of the business under study. The analyst must then ask why the business uses the 
current system. There may be good reasons for doing business using the current methods, and 
these should be considered when designing any new system.
If the reason for current operations is that “it’s always been done that way,” the analyst may 
wish to improve on the procedures. At the completion of this phase, the analyst should understand 
how users accomplish their work when interacting with a computer and begin to know how to 
make the new system more useful and usable. The analyst should also know how the business 
functions and have complete information on the people, goals, data, and procedures involved.
Analyzing System Needs
The next phase that the systems analyst undertakes involves analyzing system needs. Again, spe-
cial tools and techniques help the analyst make requirements determinations. Tools such as data 
flow diagrams (DFDs) record the input, processes, and output of the business’s functions, and 
activity diagrams or sequence diagrams show the sequence of events, illustrating systems in a 
structured, graphic form. From data flow, sequence, or other diagrams, a data dictionary is devel-
oped that lists all the data items used in the system, as well as their specifications.
During this phase, the systems analyst also analyzes the structured decisions made. Struc-
tured decisions are those for which the conditions, condition alternatives, actions, and action rules 
can be determined. Three major tools are used when analyzing structured decisions: structured 
English, decision tables, and decision trees.
At this point in the SDLC, the systems analyst prepares a systems proposal that summarizes 
what has been discovered about the users, usability, and usefulness of current systems; provides 
cost–benefit analyses of alternatives; and makes recommendations on what (if anything) should be 
done. If one of the recommendations is acceptable to management, the analyst proceeds along that 
course. Each systems problem is unique, and there is never just one correct solution. The way a 
recommendation or solution is formulated depends on the individual qualities and professional train-
ing of each analyst and the analyst’s interaction with users in the context of their work environment.
Designing the Recommended System
In the design phase of the SDLC, the systems analyst uses the information collected earlier to 
accomplish the logical design of the information system. The analyst designs procedures for users 
to help them accurately enter data so that data going into the information system are correct.  
At home and in our visits to university campuses and businesses 
around the world, we’ve noticed that students and organizations are 
increasingly showing an interest in Macs. Therefore, we thought it 
would add a little bit of interest to show some of the Mac options 
available to a systems designer. Today, about 15 percent of personal 
computers purchased in the United States are Macs. For 14 years, 
Apple used Intel CPUs (similar to PCs) along with 3rd party graphics 
processors and other parts. Apple redesigned this collection of parts 
in 2020 as a system on a chip (SoC). It is commonly called Apple 
silicon. Apple desktops and notebooks could still run Windows on 
their M-series processors, but only by using virtualization software. 
The first application to do so was Parallels Desktop for Mac.
Adopters of Macs have cited many reasons for using Macs, 
including better security built into the Mac operating system, 
intelligent backup using the built-in Time Machine, the multi-
tude of applications already included, the reliability of setup and 
networking, and the ability to sync Macs with other Macs and 
iPhones. The most compelling reason, we think, is the design itself.
MAC APPEAL


===== BOOK PAGE 8 =====

8    PART i •  S y STEMS AnAly SiS FUnDAMEnTAlS
In addition, the analyst provides for users to complete effective input to the information system 
by using techniques of good form and web page or screen design.
Part of the logical design of the information system is devising the human–computer 
interaction (HCI). The interface connects the user with the system and is extremely important. 
The user interface is designed with the help of users to make sure the system is audible, legible, 
and safe, as well as attractive and enjoyable to use. Examples of physical user interfaces include 
a keyboard (to type in questions and answers), onscreen menus (to elicit user commands), and a 
variety of graphical user interfaces (GUIs) that use a mouse or touch screen.
The design phase also includes designing databases that will store much of the data needed by 
decision makers in the organization. Users benefit from a well-organized database that is logical to 
them and corresponds to the way they view their work. In this phase, the analyst also works with 
users to design output (either onscreen or printed) that meets their information needs.
Developing and Documenting Software
In the fifth phase of the SDLC, the analyst works with coders to develop any original software that is 
needed. During this phase, the analyst works with users to develop effective documentation for soft-
ware, including procedure manuals, online help, and websites featuring frequently asked questions 
(FAQs) or Read Me files shipped with new software. Because users are involved from the beginning, 
documentation should address the questions they have raised and solved jointly with the analyst. 
Documentation tells users how to use software and what to do if software problems occur.
Coders have a key role in this phase because they design, code, and remove syntactical errors 
from computer programs. To ensure quality, a coder may conduct either a design or a code walk-
through, explaining complex portions of the software to a team of other coders.
Testing and Maintaining the System
Before an information system can be used, it must be tested. It is much less costly to catch prob-
lems before rather than after the system is signed over to users. Coders alone complete some of the 
testing, and some testing is done by systems analysts in conjunction with coders. A series of tests 
to pinpoint problems is run, first with sample data and eventually with actual data from the current 
system. Test plans often are created early in the SDLC and are refined as the project progresses.
Maintenance of the system and its documentation begins in this phase and is carried out 
routinely throughout the life of the information system. Much of the coder’s routine work consists 
of maintenance, and businesses spend a great deal of money on maintenance. Some maintenance, 
such as program updates, can be done automatically via a vendor site on the web. Many of the 
systematic procedures the analyst employs throughout the SDLC can help ensure that maintenance 
is kept to a minimum.
Implementing and Evaluating the System
In this last phase of systems development, the analyst helps implement the information system. 
This phase involves training users to handle the system. Vendors do some training, but oversight 
of training is the responsibility of the systems analyst. In addition, the analyst needs to plan for 
a smooth conversion from the old system to the new one. This process includes converting files 
from old formats to new ones or building a database, installing equipment, and bringing the new 
system into production.
Evaluation is included as part of this final phase of the SDLC, but in fact evaluation takes 
place during every phase. A key criterion that must be satisfied is whether the intended users are 
indeed using the system. It should be noted that systems work is often cyclical. When an analyst 
finishes one phase of systems development and proceeds to the next, the discovery of a problem 
may force the analyst to return to the previous phase and modify the work done there.
The Impact of Maintenance
After the system is installed, it must be maintained, meaning that the computer applications must 
be modified and kept up to date. Estimates of the time spent by departments on maintenance 
have ranged from 48 percent to 60 percent of the total time spent developing systems. Very little 
time remains for new systems development. As the number of programs written increases, so does 
the amount of maintenance they require.


===== BOOK PAGE 9 =====

CHAPTER 1  •  Sy STEMS , RolES , AnD  DEvEloPMEnT  METHoDologiES     9
Maintenance is performed for two reasons. The first of these is to correct software errors. 
No matter how thoroughly a system is tested, bugs or errors creep into computer applications. 
Bugs in commercial PC software are often documented as “known anomalies,” and they are cor-
rected when new versions of the software are released or in an interim release. In custom software 
(also called bespoke software), bugs must be corrected as they are detected.
The other reason for performing system maintenance is to enhance the software’s capabili-
ties in response to changing organizational needs, generally involving one of the following three 
situations:
1. Users often request additional features after they become familiar with the computer 
system and its capabilities.
2. The business changes over time.
3. Hardware and software are changing at an accelerated pace.
Figure 1.2 illustrates the number of resources—usually time and money—spent on systems 
development and maintenance. The area under the curve represents the total dollar amount spent. 
You can see that, over time, the total cost of maintenance is likely to exceed that of systems 
development. At a certain point it becomes more feasible to perform a new systems study because 
the cost of continued maintenance is clearly greater than the cost of creating an entirely new 
information system.
In summary, maintenance is an ongoing process over the life cycle of an information system. 
After the information system is installed, maintenance usually takes the form of correcting previously 
undetected software errors. Once these are corrected, the system approaches a steady state, provid-
ing dependable service to its users. Maintenance during this period may consist of removing a few 
previously undetected bugs and updating the system with a few minor enhancements. As time goes 
on and the business and technology changes, however, the maintenance effort increases dramatically.
Using CASE Tools
Analysts who adopt the SDLC approach often benefit from productivity tools called computer-
aided software engineering (CASE) tools, created explicitly to improve their routine work using 
automated support. Analysts rely on CASE tools to increase productivity, communicate more 
effectively with users, and integrate the work that they do on the system from the beginning to 
the end of the life cycle.
All the information about the project is stored in an encyclopedia called the CASE reposi-
tory, a large collection of records, elements, diagrams, screens, reports, and other information 
(see Figure 1.3). Analysis reports may be produced using the repository information to show 
where the design is incomplete or contains errors.
Visible Analyst (V A) is one example of a CASE tool that enables systems analysts to do 
graphical planning, analysis, and design to build complex client/server applications and databases. 
Visible Analyst and software products such as Microsoft Visio or OmniGraffle allow users to draw 
and modify diagrams easily. However, V A is a full-fledged CASE tool with a repository and other 
features, whereas the other two are not. Instead, they are software for drawing diagrams.
FIGURE 1.2 
Resource consumption over the 
system life.
Amount of
Resources
Consumed,
Time and
Money
Systems
Development
Postinstallation
Bugs
Minor Changes
Due to Bugs and
Enhancements
Major Changes
in Both Business
and Technology
Time
Installation
Day


===== BOOK PAGE 10 =====

10    PART i •  S y STEMS AnAly SiS FUnDAMEnTAlS
Analysts and users alike report that CASE tools afford them a means of communication 
about the system during its conceptualization. Using automated support featuring onscreen out-
put, clients can readily see how data flows and other system concepts are depicted, and they can 
then request corrections or changes that would have taken too much time with older tools. CASE 
tools also help support the modeling of an organization’s functional requirements, assist analysts 
and users in drawing the boundaries for a given project, and help them visualize how the project 
meshes with other parts of the organization. In later chapters, we consider process and task mining 
tools that help identify where automating business processes would be most helpful.
THE AGILE APPROACH
Although this text takes as its starting point SDLC processes, at times, an analyst will recognize 
that their organization could benefit from an alternative approach. Perhaps a systems project using 
a structured approach has recently failed, or perhaps the organization subcultures, composed of 
several different user groups, seem more in step with an alternative method. We cannot do justice 
to these methods in a small space; each deserves and has inspired its own books and research. 
FIGURE 1.3 
The repository concept.
ADD CUSTOMER
NUMBER XXXXXX
NAME XXXXXXXXXXXX
STREET XXXXXXXXXXXX
CITY XXXXXXXXXXXX
STATE XX
ZIP XXXXX-XXXX
SALES ANALYSIS REPORT
ITEM
DESCRIPTION
TOTAL
SALES
XXXXXXXXXXXXXX
XXXXXXXXXXXXXX
XXXXXXXXXXXXXX
XXXXXXXXXXXXXX
XXXXXXXXXXXXXX
XXXXXXXXXXXXXX
ZZ,ZZ9
ZZ,ZZ9
ZZ,ZZ9
ZZ,ZZ9
ZZ,ZZ9
ZZ,ZZ9
Screen and
Report Design
System Diagrams
and Models
DO WHILE NOT End of ﬁle
Read Item record
IF Item is low in stock
Print Purchase Order
Update Item record
ENDIF
ENDDO
Data Dictionary and
Process Logic
Project Management
System Requirements
• Add new customers
• Identify fast- and slow-selling
items
• Enter customer orders
• Look up customer credit
balance
• Maintain adequate inventory
Deliverables
• Add customer screen
• Item Analysis Report
• Customer order entry screen
• Customer inquiry screen
• Vendor purchase order
program
• Seasonal forecasting
Number +
Description +
Cost +
Price +
Quantity on hand +
Quantity on order +
Reorder point +
Monthly sales +
Year to date sales
Item =


===== BOOK PAGE 11 =====

CHAPTER 1  •  Sy STEMS , RolES , AnD  DEvEloPMEnT  METHoDologiES     11
By mentioning these approaches here, however, we hope to help you become aware that under 
certain circumstances, your organization may want to consider an alternative or a supplement to 
structured analysis and design and to the SDLC.
Agile development is a methodology that is an outgrowth of the object-oriented approach 
(OOA) to systems development that includes a method of development (including generating 
information requirements) as well as software tools. In this text, it is paired with prototyping in 
Chapter 6. (There is more about OOAs in Chapter 10.) According to the Project Management 
Institute, Agile development is an adaptive lifecycle. (2021).
The agile approach is a software development methodology based on values, principles, 
and core practices. The four values are communication, simplicity, feedback, and courage. We 
recommend that systems analysts adopt these values in all projects they undertake, not just when 
adopting the agile approach.
To finish a project, adjustments often need to be made in project management. In Chapter 6, 
we will see that agile  methods can ensure successful completion of a project by adjusting the 
important resources of time, cost, quality, and scope. When these four control variables are prop-
erly included in the planning, there is a state of balance among the resources and the activities 
needed to complete the project.
Taking development practices to the extreme is most noticeable when one pursues practices 
that are unique to agile development. In Chapter 6 we discuss four core agile practices: short 
releases, the 40-hour workweek, hosting an onsite customer, and using pair programming. At first 
glance these practices appear extreme, but as you will see, we can learn some important lessons 
from incorporating many of the values and practices of the agile approach into systems analysis 
and design projects.
We also explore an agile method called Scrum, which is named after a starting position in 
the sport of rugby. Scrum’s success has much to do with its extremely quick releases. A typical 
sprint cycle will last between two and four weeks. At the end of that period, the development team 
is expected to produce a potentially releasable product. That means that applications or websites 
are constantly changing. Each iteration boasts a new set of features produced during the sprint 
cycle. Scrum is also unique because team members choose what they want to work on as a team. 
Scrum is discussed further in Chapter 6. Let’s return to discussing the agile approach in general.
Activities and behaviors shape the way development team members and customers act during 
the development of an agile project. Two words that characterize a project done following the agile 
methodology are interactive and incremental. Figure 1.4 illustrates the five distinct stages of the 
agile approach: exploration, planning, iterations to the first release, productionizing, and mainte-
nance. Notice the three red arrows that loop back into the “Iterations” box and symbolize incremental 
changes created through repeated testing and feedback that eventually lead to a stable but evolving 
system. Also, note that multiple looping arrows feed back into the productionizing phase. These 
symbolize that the pace of iterations increases after a product is released. The red arrow is shown 
leaving the maintenance stage and returning to the planning stage, illustrating a continuous feedback 
loop involving customers and the development team as they agree to alter the evolving system.
Exploration
During the exploration phase , you explore your environment, asserting your conviction that 
the problem can and should be approached with agile development, assemble the team, and 
assess team member skills. This stage takes anywhere from a few weeks (if you already know 
your team members and technology) to a few months (if everything is new). You also will be 
actively examining potential technologies needed to build the new system. During this stage you 
should practice estimating the time needed for a variety of tasks. In exploration, customers also are 
experimenting with writing user stories. The goal is to get the customer to refine a story enough 
so that you can competently estimate the amount of time it will take to build the solution into the 
system you are planning. This stage is all about adopting a playful and curious attitude toward the 
work environment, its problems, technologies, and people.
Planning
The next stage of the agile development process is called the planning phase. In contrast to the 
first stage, planning may take only a few days to accomplish. In this stage, you and your customers 
agree on a date anywhere from two months to half a year from the current date to deliver solutions


===== BOOK PAGE 12 =====

12    PART i •  S y STEMS AnAly SiS FUnDAMEnTAlS
to their most pressing business problems (you will be addressing the smallest, most valuable set 
of stories). If your exploration activities were sufficient, this stage should be very short.
The entire agile planning process has been characterized using the idea of a planning game, 
as devised by Kent Beck, the father of Extreme Programming. The planning game spells out rules 
that can help formulate the agile development team’s relationship with their business customers. 
Although the rules form an idea of how you want each party to act during development, they 
are not meant as a replacement for a relationship. They are a basis for building and maintaining 
a relationship.
Using the metaphor of a game, we talk in terms of the goal of the game, the strategy to pursue, 
the pieces to move, and the players involved. The goal of the game is to maximize the value of the 
system produced by the agile team. To arrive at the value, you have to deduct costs of development 
and the time, expense, and uncertainty taken on so that the development project can go forward.
The strategy pursued by the agile development team is always one of limiting uncertainty 
(downplaying risk). To do that they design the simplest solution possible, put the system into 
production as soon as possible, get feedback from the business customer about what’s working, 
and adapt their design from there. Story cards become the pieces in the planning game that briefly 
describe the task, provide notes, and provide an area for task tracking.
The two main players in the planning game are the development team and the business cus-
tomer. Deciding which business group will be the business customer is not always easy because 
the agile process is an unusually demanding role for the customer to play. Customers decide 
what the development team should tackle first. Their decisions will set priorities and check func-
tionalities throughout the process.
Iterations to the First Release
The third stage in the agile development process is composed of iterations to the first release. 
Typically, these iterations (cycles of testing, feedback, and change) are about three weeks in 
duration. You will be pushing yourself to sketch out the entire architecture of the system, even 
though it is just in outline or skeletal form. One goal is to run customer-written function tests at 
the end of each iteration. During the iterations stage you should also question whether the schedule 
FIGURE 1.4 
The five stages of the agile 
modeling development process 
show that frequent iterations are 
essential for successful system 
development.
Planning
Exploration
Maintenance
Iterations to the
First Release
Productionizing
. . . and increase
the pace of
iterations after
the product is
released.
Agile methods involve
the customer in many
iterations prior to
the ﬁrst
release . . .


===== BOOK PAGE 13 =====

CHAPTER 1  •  Sy STEMS , RolES , AnD  DEvEloPMEnT  METHoDologiES     13
needs to be altered or whether you are tackling too many stories. Make small rituals out of each 
successful iteration, involving customers as well as developers. Always celebrate your progress, 
even if it is small, because this is part of the culture of motivating everyone to work extremely 
hard on the project.
Productionizing
Several activities occur during the productionizing phase. In this phase the feedback cycle speeds 
up so that rather than receiving feedback for an iteration every three weeks, software revisions 
are being turned around in one week. You may institute daily briefings, so everyone knows what 
everyone else is doing. The product is released in this phase, but it may be improved by adding 
other features. Getting a system into production is an exciting event. Make time to celebrate with 
your teammates and mark the occasion. One of the keys to the agile approach, which we heartily 
embrace, is that it is supposed to be fun to develop systems!
Maintenance
Once a system has been released, it needs to be kept running smoothly, which is called the main-
tenance phase. New features may be added, riskier customer suggestions may be considered, and 
team members may be rotated on or off the team. The attitude you take at this point in the develop-
ment process is more conservative than at any other time. You are now in a “keeper of the flame” 
mode rather than the playful one you experienced during exploration.
OBJECT-ORIENTED SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
Object-oriented (O-O) systems analysis and design is an approach intended to facilitate the 
development of systems that must change rapidly in response to dynamic business environments. 
Chapter 10 helps you understand what O-O systems analysis and design is, how it differs from the 
structured approach of the SDLC, and when it may be appropriate to use an OOA.
Object-oriented techniques often work well in situations in which complicated informa-
tion systems are undergoing continuous maintenance, adaptation, and redesign. Object-oriented 
approaches use the industry standard for modeling O-O systems, called unified modeling 
language (UML), to break down a system into a use case model.
Object-oriented programming differs from traditional procedural programming in that it 
examines objects that are part of a system. Each object is a computer representation of some 
actual thing or event. Objects may be customers, items, orders, and so on. Objects are represented 
by and grouped into classes that are optimal for reuse and maintainability. A class defines the set 
of shared attributes and behaviors found in each object in the class.
Object-Oriented Similarities to SDLC
The phases in UML are like those in the SDLC. Because these two methods share rigid and exact-
ing modeling, they happen at a slower, more deliberate pace than the phases of agile modeling. 
An analyst goes through problem and identification phases, an analysis phase, and a design phase, 
as shown in Figure 1.5.
Although the specifics are discussed in Chapters 2 and 10, the following steps provide a brief 
description of the UML process.
Define the Use Case Model. In this phase, the analyst identifies the actors and the major events 
initiated by the actors. Often the analyst starts by drawing a diagram with stick figures rep-
resenting the actors and arrows showing how the actors relate. This is called a use case dia-
gram (Chapter 2), and it represents the standard flow of events in the system. Then an analyst 
typically writes up a use case scenario (Chapter 2), which describes in words the steps that are 
normally performed.
During the Systems Analysis Phase, Begin Drawing UML Diagrams.  In the second phase 
(Chapter 10), the analyst draws activity diagrams, which illustrate all the major activities in the 
use case. In addition, the analyst creates one or more sequence diagrams for each use case that 
show the sequence of activities and their timing. This is an opportunity to go back and review the 
use cases, rethink them, and modify them, if necessary.


===== BOOK PAGE 14 =====

14    PART i •  S y STEMS AnAly SiS FUnDAMEnTAlS
Continuing in the Analysis Phase, Develop Class Diagrams. The nouns in the use cases are objects 
that potentially can be grouped into classes. For example, every automobile is an object that shares 
characteristics with other automobiles. Together, they make up a class.
Still in the Analysis Phase, Draw Statechart Diagrams. The class diagrams are used to draw state-
chart diagrams, which help in understanding complex processes that cannot be fully derived by 
the sequence diagrams. The statechart diagrams are extremely useful in modifying class diagrams, 
so the iterative process of UML modeling continues.
Begin Systems Design by Modifying the UML Diagrams, then Complete the Specifications. Systems 
design means modifying the existing system, and that implies modifying the diagrams drawn in 
the previous phase. These diagrams can be used to derive classes, their attributes, and methods 
(methods are simply operations). An analyst will need to write class specifications for each class, 
including the attributes, methods, and their descriptions. The analyst also will develop method 
specifications that detail the input and output requirements for each method, along with a detailed 
description of the internal processing of the method.
Develop and Document the System. UML is, of course, a modeling language. An analyst may 
create wonderful models, but if the system isn’t developed, there is not much point in building 
models. Documentation is critical. The more complete the information you provide to the devel-
opment team through documentation and UML diagrams is, the faster the development and the 
more solid the final production system.
Object-oriented methodologies often focus on small, quick iterations of development, some-
times called the spiral model. Analysis is performed on a small part of the system, usually starting 
with a high-priority item or perhaps the item that has the greatest risk. This is followed by design 
and implementation. The cycle is repeated with analysis of the next part, design, and some imple-
mentation, and this is repeated until the project is complete. Reworking diagrams and the compo-
nents themselves is normal. UML is a powerful modeling tool that can greatly improve the quality 
of your systems analysis and design and the final product.
FIGURE 1.5 
The steps in the UML 
development process.
Modify Diagrams and
Complete
Speciﬁcations
 Develop and
Document the
System
Draw Use Case
Diagrams
Write Use Case
Scenarios
Derive Activity
Diagrams from Use
Cases
Develop Sequence
Diagrams
Draw Statechart
Diagrams
Create Class
Diagrams
Systems Analysis
Phase
Systems Design
Phase
Problem Identiﬁcation
Phase
Begin Object-Oriented
Analysis and Design


===== BOOK PAGE 15 =====

CHAPTER 1  •  Sy STEMS , RolES , AnD  DEvEloPMEnT  METHoDologiES     15
CLOUD DEVELOPMENT LIFE CYCLE
Cloud Computing
The most rapidly growing type of computing is cloud computing. Cloud computing has been 
described as a metaphor for the internet because the internet is often drawn as a cloud in network 
diagrams. Using cloud computing, organizations and individual users can use web services, database 
services, and application services over the internet without having to invest in corporate or personal 
hardware, software, or software tools. Figure 1.6 depicts the exchanges between client computers 
and services in the cloud. Businesses use web browsers such as Google Chrome or Mozilla Firefox 
to access applications. As you can see, servers store software and data for businesses.
Many large, well-established hardware, software, and consulting companies such as Cisco, 
Dell, IBM, HP, Microsoft, SAP, Amazon Web Services (AWS), and others are creating massive 
cloud computing endeavors, often with what are termed “virtualized resources.” What is distinct 
about these approaches is their ability to grow and adapt to changing business needs. That is, they 
are scalable to suit growing (or changing) demand by users. The model of Software as a Service 
(SaaS) is included in the concept of cloud computing.
Users do not need to understand, control, or be experts in the technology infrastructure that 
composes the complex cloud infrastructure that enables them to accomplish their work. Often, 
organizations do not need to keep IT staff to scale up systems or scale down systems, even when 
FIGURE 1.6 
Cloud computing offers many 
services.
Web Services Application ServicesDatabase Services
Client Computers


===== BOOK PAGE 16 =====

16    PART i •  S y STEMS AnAly SiS FUnDAMEnTAlS
a contract or company budget changes upward or downward because of the lessened impact of 
these changes.
Often organizations that are using cloud computing do not find it necessary to make up-front 
capital expenditures on IT infrastructure, so it enables smaller companies with smaller and less 
predictable budgets to make advances in processing more quickly. It also allows larger corpora-
tions to invest in strategic projects rather than IT infrastructure. Sharing IT resources via cloud 
computing means that a large collection of corporate users share web services, but also then 
jointly bear the lowered cost of them, realizing increases in peak-load capacity and ensuring that 
underutilized systems are used more efficiently and widely.
Companies also hope to improve their ability to perform disaster recovery by using cloud 
computing, which provides many redundant sites. Cloud computing is not immune to outages, 
but it can spread the risk to multiple servers.
Organizations try to improve security via cloud computing by using services that are sold 
as possessing a security focus. However, there are concerns that centralization of this sort can 
translate into loss of control over mission-critical data. Users might benefit from the mobility 
afforded by being liberated from a single computer installation or a single interface. Rather, web 
browsers and web-based services made available through cloud computing free users to access 
applications from anywhere at any time without regard for location or the device they are using.
Many large software companies (some of which are called “pure players” because they have 
never existed as brick-and-mortar enterprises) are offering applications using cloud computing, 
and users can use their web browser to access applications. These include Google Apps (for spread-
sheets and calendars), AWS, Akami, and customer relationship management (CRM) software by 
Salesforce.com, which is now available on the iPhone as well. These software purveyors state 
that they are attempting to lower the cost to the user, as well as to provide increased flexibility.
Some observers believe that the move to cloud computing is a way for older, larger companies 
to solidify and retain their core businesses by incorporating SaaS, SOA (service-oriented architec-
ture), virtualization, open source, and many other trends from the past decade into their offerings 
of software, software tools, services, and computing power via the internet.
Cloud Computing Trade-Offs. Researchers note that concern about privacy and security serve as 
key barriers to organizations’ adoption of cloud technology. They note that there are many ways 
to address such barriers; most frequently these take the form of fixes via technology (hardware or 
software) that can be implemented or business responses (improved staff training, making security 
of cloud computing a strategic priority, and so on) that can be strategized through management. 
Sometimes it is the local IT department that is wary of giving control over corporate data and pro-
cesses to cloud providers that unnecessarily impede the adoption of cloud computing, raising fears 
that are not supported by risk assessment but rather bolstered by instincts for self-preservation, or 
at the very least, preservation of the status quo.
By now you are accustomed to the idea that businesses must make trade-offs in the adoption 
of a technological or organizational solution. Inevitably, businesses will be evaluating cloud pro-
viders, sometimes with the participation of the systems analyst. If that is the case, your ability to 
systematically evaluate and compare cloud providers can be valuable to your client.
One major decision is whether to use an external cloud provider (public cloud) or an internal 
one (private cloud) that can be realized by centralizing the organization’s data centers through a 
privately configured cloud service. Sometimes the decision to use a public cloud has to do with 
how critical it is for the company to strategically control data. A hybrid approach, in which more 
critical data linked to strategic aims and corporate intellectual property are held in a private cloud, 
and less critical data for the same organization makes use of a public cloud, may be a solution.
One of the biggest contributions an analyst can make is to help with weighing risks to security 
of data versus the value of the data being stored and used. One way is to evaluate the disaster 
recovery plans of cloud providers who are dealing with any mission-critical data that are being 
considered as candidates for cloud storage.
Factors in Choosing a Cloud Provider. Here are a few questions you will want to pose as you 
evaluate cloud service providers for your information systems clients:
1. If a client of the cloud services provider is hacked, how will it adversely affect other busi-
nesses the cloud provider is hosting?


===== BOOK PAGE 17 =====

CHAPTER 1  •  Sy STEMS , RolES , AnD  DEvEloPMEnT  METHoDologiES     17
2. How can your client be sure data are completely deleted from cloud systems when these 
systems are eventually decommissioned?
3. Are the data architectures being used by the cloud provider standard and transparent so if 
the client wants to switch providers over cost or security concerns, it would be realistic to 
do so?
4. Are there too many nonstandard practices and proprietary programming structures in use, 
making transferring data out of the question?
5. How can your client be certain that no one at the cloud provider or their staff working for 
other clients has access to your organization’s data?
Once you are able to compare answers of the cloud providers, you and your client can decide 
which cloud service provider is most appropriate for the type of computing requirements that 
have surfaced over the course of your project engagement. Because different countries and juris-
dictions (for example, the European Union or the United States) have differing laws covering 
privacy of data stored in cloud systems and whether the government can have access to data of 
private citizens, it has, in some cases, become a consideration to find out where cloud providers 
are located and whether all laws and regulations regarding privacy and security of the users and 
their location are being properly observed by cloud providers.
ERP Systems and the Cloud. Researchers are suggesting that many of the issues and challenges 
associated with implementing enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems can be mitigated 
by new, lower-cost ERP offerings that take advantage of cloud computing. Organizations do not 
have to purchase costly new IT; new versions and upgrades of ERP software are maintained and 
installed by the ERP cloud vendor and switching to other modules may be less cumbersome 
than before.
A vendor called Workday (www.workday.com; created by two PeopleSoft veterans), pro-
vides SaaS solutions for midrange to large organizations. These solutions are advertised as low 
cost and easy to upgrade, offer a reduction in data storage costs, provide a greener IT footprint, 
and are less cumbersome than traditional ERP implementations using a predictable subscrip-
tion pricing model. In addition, Workday asserts that its systems address some of the long-
standing problems experienced with legacy ERP implementations, including unpredictable costs 
of on-premises ERP systems, piecemeal solutions to IT business problems, and variable level 
of service.
Another prominent cloud ERP vendor is NetSuite (www.netsuite.com), which offers account-
ing software, real-time inventory management, CRM software, ecommerce, and real-time global 
business management to small and medium-sized enterprises. NetSuite, which was acquired by 
Oracle in 2016, differentiates its services by emphasizing reduced IT cost and real-time visibility 
and anywhere, anytime access to business information that decision makers find critical to running 
an organization.
As with any other endeavor in the cloud, but especially an ERP system that can store sensitive 
corporate data and run mission-critical applications, organizations are creating new tools to assess 
the potential value to furthering strategic objectives, assess the risk to the enterprise, examine 
the security issues, gauge the probability of user acceptance, and gauge the likelihood of success 
in integrating a cloud-based ERP into their IT supply chain. As an analyst, you have developed 
several data collection and analytical tools that can facilitate the ability of the organization to come 
to reasonable decisions about adopting cloud-based ERP.
Implementing CDLC
According to NIST (National Institute of Standards and Technology of the U.S. Department of 
Commerce), it is useful to think of the cloud model as possessing five essential characteristics, 
three service models, and four deployment models (Mell & Grance, 2011).
The five essential characteristics include:
1. On-demand self service
2. Broad network access
3. Resource pooling
4. Rapid elasticity
5. Measured service


===== BOOK PAGE 18 =====

18    PART i •  S y STEMS AnAly SiS FUnDAMEnTAlS
The three service models include:
1. Software as a Service (SaaS)
2. Platform as a Service (PaaS)
3. Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)
The four deployment models include:
1. Private cloud
2. Community cloud
3. Public cloud
4. Hybrid cloud
When we compare the SDLC to the cloud development life cycle (CDLC), we notice several 
key differences. Above all it is important to note that the two differ in terms of when hardware 
decisions are made, and this change in the life cycle may push the decision maker to go with 
cloud computing earlier rather than later in the development process. The CDLC is a predictive 
life cycle, and you can see the similarities between the phases of the SDLC and the CDLC.
The six phases of the CDLC are data gathering, development, launch, continuing operations, 
optimization, and improvement. The SDLC and the CDLC differ in development and launch 
phases. The cloud development life cycle can offer inexpensive testing, in that “pentesting” (also 
known as penetration testing, or a simulated cyberattack) can be done on servers that are part of 
development relatively inexpensively. The SDLC does not offer that because implementation of 
testing is done after installation of hardware and software.
The CDLC also differs from the SDLC in that collaboration with the development ecosystem 
permits the developers access to data and a lower amount of time invested for other tasks such as 
a diverse range of system tests. Additionally, using a CDLC approach is faster than the traditional 
SDLC. Implementation times can be reduced when the infrastructure is maintained and managed 
by the cloud supplier rather than the development team of the host organization. Both collabora-
tion and integration with cloud services (such as AWS) give the business the potential to scale 
up across the organization rapidly and to interface with outside software vendors rapidly as well.
There are five strategic considerations in implementing cloud-based systems (adapted from 
Elman, 2020; Hill, 2019):
1. Choose cloud computing if the overriding justification for the systems project is to 
save money usually spent for on-premises data centers, their maintenance, and support 
personnel.
2. Start small and build your cloud endeavors gradually so that they can be expanded later.
3. Choose multiple cloud providers in order to avoid getting stuck with one vendor.
4. Monitor changes created by cloud computing as closely as you would for any other IT 
transformation project. This includes ensuring visibility of applications and data from 
multiple systems.
5. Develop an integration strategy. Make the most of the hybrid ecosystem, capitalizing on 
new synergies, relationships, and rapid development opportunities created by your cloud 
implementations.
CHOOSING WHICH SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT  
METHOD TO USE
The differences among the four approaches described here are not as large as they seem at the 
outset. In all four approaches, the analyst needs to understand the organization first (Chapter 
2). Then the analyst or project team needs to budget time and resources and develop a project 
proposal (Chapter 3). Next, they need to interview organization members and gather detailed 
data using questionnaires (Chapter 4) and sample data from existing reports and by observing 
how business is currently transacted (Chapter 5). The four approaches have all of these activities 
in common.
Even the methods themselves have similarities. The SDLC and OOAs both require extensive 
planning and diagramming. The agile approach and the OOA both allow subsystems to be built


===== BOOK PAGE 19 =====

CHAPTER 1  •  Sy STEMS , RolES , AnD  DEvEloPMEnT  METHoDologiES     19
one at a time until the entire system is complete. The agile, SDLC, and CDLC approaches are all 
concerned with the way data logically moves through the system.
So, given a choice to develop a system using an SDLC approach, an agile approach, an OOA, 
or a CDLC approach, which would you choose? Figure 1.7 provides a set of guidelines to help 
you choose which method to use when developing your next system.
DEVELOPING OPEN SOURCE SOFTWARE
An alternative to traditional software development in which proprietary code is hidden from the 
users is called open source software (OSS). With OSS, many users and coders can study, share, 
and modify the code or computer instructions. Rules of this community include the idea that any 
program modifications must be shared with all the people on the project and that all licenses must 
be adhered to.
Development of OSS also has been characterized as a philosophy rather than simply as the 
process of creating new software. Those involved in OSS communities often view it as a way to 
help societies change. However, it would be an oversimplification to think of OSS as a monolithic 
movement, and it does little to reveal what type of users or user analysts are developing OSS 
projects and on what basis.
Open source software is code that is meant to be just that: open to the public to be seen, 
changed, and distributed however the developer sees as appropriate. It is created in a coopera-
tive way with the understanding that each participant will contribute, and all who contribute 
FIGURE 1.7 
How to decide which development 
method to use.
The Cloud Development Life
Cycle (CDLC) Approach
•   the justiﬁcation for the systems project is to save
     money usually spent for on-premises data centers
•   the project can start small and build
•   multiple cloud providers can be used
•   changes created by the cloud can be monitored for
     visibility of apps and data from multiple systems
•   an integration strategy can be developed to capitalize
     on new synergies
Choose When 
Agile Methodologies
The Systems Development
Life Cycle (SDLC) Approach
Object-Oriented
Methodologies
•   the customer is satisﬁed with incremental improvements
•   applications need to be developed quickly in response to
     a dynamic environment 
•   there is a project champion of agile methods in the
    organization
•   a rescue takes place (the system failed and there is no time
     to ﬁgure out what went wrong)
•   executives and analysts agree with the principles of agile
     methodologies
•   the problems modeled lend themselves to classes 
•   an organization supports the UML learning 
•   systems can be added gradually, one subsystem at a time
•   reuse of previously written software is a possibility
•   it is acceptable to tackle the difﬁcult problems ﬁrst
•   systems have been developed and documented using SDLC
•   it is important to document each step of the way
•   communication of how new systems work is important
•   upper-level management feels more comfortable or safe
     using SDLC
•   there are adequate resources and time to complete the full
     SDLC


===== BOOK PAGE 20 =====

20    PART i •  S y STEMS AnAly SiS FUnDAMEnTAlS
will benefit. It is a communal process and product. All open source code is governed by open 
source licenses, and licenses must go through a review process before being accepted.
If you have an Android phone, you are using an open source operating system. Widely known 
open source projects include Apache for developing a web server, the browser Mozilla Firefox, 
and Linux, which is a Unix-like free open source operating system. Other open source technolo-
gies that are current and increasing in popularity include blockchain, cybersecurity, the Internet 
of Things (IoT), cloud computing, big data analytics, and many more. You can read about these 
technologies in upcoming chapters.
The Open Source Movement
To help us understand the open source movement, researchers have recently categorized open source 
communities into four types—ad hoc, standardized, organized, and commercial—along six different 
dimensions: general structure, environment, goals, methods, user community, and licensing. Some 
researchers argue that OSS is at a crossroads and that the commercial and community open source 
groups need to understand where they converge and where the potential for conflict exists.
Large nonprofit foundations that support the use of open source projects include The Apache 
Foundation, which was formed by a group of developers of the Apache HTTP server and The 
Linux Foundation. The Linux Foundation is a nonprofit organization dedicated to advancing 
the technical improvement of the open source Linux operating system and education and col-
laboration around open source development of the Linux kernel, as well as the tools and services 
that go along with it. The foundation hosts over 500 open source projects. It helps open source 
projects with formation, governance, and collaboration.
Online, GitHub (purchased by Microsoft in 2018) serves as a software development platform 
for developers who want to store, track their work, and collaborate on open source projects. If 
you are using GitHub, you can upload your own code files and collaborate with others. Interest-
ingly, GitHub is versatile in serving as a social networking website as well. It fosters the culture 
of a community that puts developers in touch with each other to collaborate and even to sell new 
projects they would like to attract others to. GitHub uses Git, which is the most-used open source 
version control software used by developers. It is important in tracking all sorts of version histories 
but, most importantly tracking file code versions.
The Third Design Space
Widespread collaboration among open source community members and corporations is a rela-
tively new phenomenon. In the past, corporations were focused on developing proprietary soft-
ware, the code for which was watchfully guarded against outsiders, in order to give the company 
an edge against competitors regarding new software products and IT strategy. Open source com-
munities were pursuing improvement of code and building a supportive community for the values 
and practices of open source software.
Our research team identified and described new collaboration between corporate developers 
and communities of developers as the Third Design Space. It is a metaphorical, not actual 
physical, space. (Kendall, Kendall, Germonprez, & Mathiassen, 2020).
Participants in the Third Design Space together make a new design environment happen; they 
create new design associations and circulate shared design resources. Their collaborations result 
in new, shared software and innovative software development processes. The process of creating 
shared software artifacts extend the impact of working in this emergent corporate-communal 
environment. While the Third Design Space arose out of prior relationships, affiliations, and 
interactions, it is ever changing and evolving. Collaboration in this innovative way leads to new 
characteristics of developers who can be thought of as both corporate and communal in this inno-
vative space. New software innovations not possible in a strictly commercial or an independent 
open source community are developed in the Third Design Space.
Benefits of Corporate Participation in Open Source  
Software Development
As you can see, there are several benefits to you and your employer for participating in the 
design of open source software. Our research team used game theory to examine interviews with 
corporate participants about open source collaboration to understand why companies participate


===== BOOK PAGE 21 =====

CHAPTER 1  •  Sy STEMS , RolES , AnD  DEvEloPMEnT  METHoDologiES     21
in open source software development (Kendall, Kendall, and Germonprez 2016). We identified 
six rational and six emotional reasons why for-profit corporations choose to develop open source 
software. They are shown in Figure 1.8.
Licensing and Compliance
Since licensing is a critical factor in the development and use of all open source software, there 
are several popular licenses, including Apache License 2.0, GNU General Public License (GPL), 
Common Development and Distribution License, and Mozilla Public License 2.0. Licenses are the 
product of community consensus, so different communities use different licenses. It is important to 
choose a license that is right for your project. On the user side of open source licenses, you need 
to identify the license that is being used for reporting purposes as well as for being sure you are 
compliant with the license.
There are accurate, efficient ways to identify what license being used in open software 
you would like to use, and there are tools, and even work groups (one sponsored by The Linux 
Foundation) called SPDX Working Group. (The initials SPDX stand for Software Package Data 
Exchange.)
A Linux Foundation Project called FOSSology is an open source license software system 
and toolkit. According to their website, “you can run license, copyright and export control scans 
from the command line.” Additionally, FOSSology provides a compliance workflow. You can use 
FOSSology to generate an SPDX file or to generate a ReadMe file with copyrights all with one 
click. FOSSology can scan an entire open source distribution, automatically submit a new version, 
and only files that have been changed will get rescanned. A great deal of time can be saved with 
this software, especially with large projects.
On an individual level, experience with open source is a skill you can add to your resume 
and is likely to help you find a position. Recently, it was reported that over 90 percent of hiring 
managers are running into a shortage of sufficient open source talent to fill positions. Many 
hiring managers are seeking certified open source workers, while about the same percentage 
(over 85 percent) are willing to help employees get certifications in the open source skills the 
organization is seeking. You can join projects by registering with GitHub, registering with specific 
projects on the Linux Foundation site, or even finding out whether your employer has an open 
source group that you can participate in.
The Role of the Analyst in Open Source Software
As an analyst you may find yourself, at the request of your chief employer, participating in an 
open source community. Over 75 percent of organizations polled said they were more reliant on 
open source software in 2022 than they were the prior year (“2022 State of Open Source Report,” 
2022). Due to this increase in demand, there is a shortage of open source developers. One widely 
known open source community is that surrounding the Linux kernel. This is a large, mostly virtual 
community of developers who all have different levels or types of participation and who all have 
FIGURE 1.8 
Six rational and six emotional 
reasons why for-profit corpora-
tions choose to develop open 
source software.
Saving money
Performing less maintenance
Contributing within limits
Reducing long-term costs
Increasing marketing beneﬁts
Making the ﬁrst move
Accepting responsibility
Improving shared software
Gaining community inﬂuence
Relinquishing the gatekeeper role
Improving developers’ skills
Extending the life of projects
Rational Emotional


===== BOOK PAGE 22 =====

22    PART i •  S y STEMS AnAly SiS FUnDAMEnTAlS
different reasons for being involved. Other well-known open source projects include Mozilla 
Firefox, Android, Apache projects, and many more. Even NASA, the U.S. National Aeronau-
tics and Space Administration, has a lively open source community (see http://ti.arc.nasa.gov/
opensource/).
One reason your company may ask you to participate in an open source community is curi-
osity about what the software benefits to the organization might be. This may be a result of a 
sort of bandwagon effect, for when it becomes known that competitors are already participating, 
your organization may want to get involved. With competitors actively participating in an open 
community, an organization may calculate that it is something that should at least be investigated 
seriously, not dismissed summarily. Another reason your company might ask you to participate 
as a developer in an open community is to achieve what researchers have labeled “responsive 
design.” Responsive design means that while you are participating in the open source community, 
you are at the same time employed by an organization that wants to leverage your participation 
in the open source community to incorporate OSS designs into proprietary products, processes, 
knowledge, and IT artifacts that it is developing and that it hopes to eventually sell as a product 
that is differentiated from what the open source community has produced. Through a process of 
responsive design, the IT artifact is imbued with both community and organization structures, 
knowledge, and practices.
Summary
Systems analysis and design is a systematic approach to identifying problems, opportunities, and objectives; 
to analyzing human- and computer-generated information flows in organizations; and to designing computer-
ized information systems to solve problems. Systems analysts are required to take on many roles in the course 
of their work. Some of these roles are (1) an outside consultant to business, (2) a supporting expert within a 
business, and (3) an agent of change in both internal and external situations. It is important that you design 
new systems with an awareness of what you can do to design security into a system from the very beginning.
Analysts possess a wide range of skills. First and foremost, an analyst is a problem solver, someone 
who enjoys the challenge of analyzing a problem and devising a workable solution. Systems analysts require 
communication skills that enable them to relate meaningfully to many different kinds of people on a daily 
basis, as well as computer skills. Understanding and relating well to users is critical to their success.
Analysts proceed systematically. The framework for their systematic approach is provided in what is 
called the systems development life cycle (SDLC). The processes of this life cycle can be divided into seven 
sequential phases, although in reality the phases are interrelated and are often accomplished simultaneously. 
The seven phases are identifying problems, opportunities, and objectives; determining human information 
requirements; analyzing system needs; designing the recommended system; developing and documenting 
software; testing and maintaining the system; and implementing and evaluating the system.
The agile approach is a software development methodology based on values, principles, and core prac-
tices. Systems that are designed using agile methods can be developed rapidly. Scrum is an agile method that 
emphasizes short releases and allows teams to choose what they want to work on. Stages in the agile devel-
opment process are exploration, planning, iterations to the first release, productionizing, and maintenance.
A third approach to systems development is called object-oriented analysis design. These techniques 
are based on object-oriented programming concepts that have become codified in unified modeling language 
(UML), a standardized modeling language in which objects that are created include not only code about data 
but also instructions about the operations to be performed on the data. Key diagrams help analyze, design, and 
communicate UML-developed systems. These systems are usually developed as components and reworking 
the components many times is typical in object-oriented analysis and design.
Cloud computing allows commerce, applications, and data storage to be served using the internet. The 
move to cloud computing is a potential way for older, larger companies to solidify and retain their core busi-
nesses by incorporating SaaS (Software as a Service), SOA (service-oriented architecture), virtualization, 
open source, and many other trends from the past decade into their offerings of software, software tools, 
services, and computing power via the internet. Analysts can implement cloud computing using the cloud 
development life cycle (CDLC). There are trade-offs in choosing cloud technology, including organization 
privacy and security. Analysts need to help companies decide between using a public or private cloud or 
adopting a hybrid approach instead.
Analysts will have increasing opportunities to participate in open source development communities, 
often through their primary organization. Open source software (OSS) is code that is meant to be just that: 
open to the public to be seen, changed, and distributed however the developer sees as appropriate. It is created


===== BOOK PAGE 23 =====

CHAPTER 1  •  Sy STEMS , RolES , AnD  DEvEloPMEnT  METHoDologiES     23
in a cooperative way with the understanding that each participant will contribute, and all who contribute will 
benefit. It is a communal process and product.
All open source code is governed by open source licenses, and licenses must go through a review process 
before being accepted.
Widespread collaboration among open source community members and corporations is a relatively 
new phenomenon. Our research team identified a metaphorical Third Design Space where participants from 
corporations and open source communities come together to create a new design environment; they make 
new design associations and circulate shared design resources. Their collaborations result in new, shared 
software and innovative software development processes.
Organizations participate in development of open source for many reasons including lowering costs, 
speeding up development, and a desire to give back something of value to the community.
Keywords and Phrases
adaptive lifecyle
agent of change
agile approach
bespoke software
cloud computing
computer-assisted software engineering (CASE)
enterprise resource planning (ERP) system
exploration phase
human–computer interaction (HCI)
iterations to the first release phase
Linux kernel
maintenance phase
object-oriented (O-O) systems analysis and 
design
open source communities
open source software (OSS)
planning game
planning phase
predictive lifecycle
private cloud
productionizing phase
prototyping
public cloud
Scrum
security
stakeholder
systems analysis and design
systems analyst
systems consultant
systems development life cycle (SDLC)
Third Design Space
unified modeling language (UML)
Review Questions
1. List the advantages of using systems analysis and design techniques in approaching computerized 
information systems for business.
2. Why is security of information systems an important consideration in systems development and 
design?
3. List three roles that a systems analyst is called upon to play. Provide a definition for each one.
4. What personal qualities are helpful to a systems analyst? List them.
5. List and briefly define the seven phases of the systems development life cycle (SDLC).
6. What are CASE tools used for?
7. Explain what is meant by the agile approach.
8. What is the meaning of the phrase planning game?
9. What are the stages in agile development?
10. What is Scrum?
11. Define the term object-oriented analysis and design.
12. What is UML?
13. What are the benefits of implementing systems and software using cloud computing?
14. What is a private cloud?
15. What is the difference between a private cloud and a public cloud?
16. Explain why ERP systems served with a cloud platform might be more affordable to small and 
medium-sized businesses than traditional ERP installations.
17. What is the cloud development life cycle (CDLC)?
18. What is open source software?
19. What are two ways a programmer can begin to contribute to open source projects?
20. What is the role of a systems analyst working in a corporation in the development of open source 
software?
21. List two reasons an organization may want its analysts to participate in an open source community.


===== BOOK PAGE 24 =====

24    PART i •  S y STEMS AnAly SiS FUnDAMEnTAlS
Selected Bibliography
2022 State of Open Source Report. (2022). https://www.openlogic.com/
resources/2022-open-source-report.
Beck, K., & Andres, C. (2004). Extreme programming explained: Embrace change (2nd ed.). 
Addison-Wesley.
Coad, P., & Yourdon, E. (1991). Object-oriented analysis (2nd ed.). Prentice Hall.
Davis, G. B., & Olson, M. H. (1985). Management information systems: Conceptual foundation, 
structure, and development (2nd ed.). McGraw-Hill.
Elman, D. (2020). The unexpected challenge of cloud transformation. https://techresearchonline.com/ 
wp-content/uploads/white-papers/nucleusresearchtheunexpectedchallengesofcloudtransformation.pdf
Germonprez, M., Kendall, J. E., Kendall, K. E., Mathiassen, L., Young, B., & Warner, B. (2017). A theory 
of responsive design: A field study of corporate engagement with open source communities. Informa-
tion Systems Research, 28(1), 64–83.
Germonprez, M., & Warner, B. (2012). Commercial participation in open innovation communities.  
In E. Lundström, J. S. Z. M. Wiberg, S. Hrastinski, M. Edenius, & P. J. Ägerfalk (Eds.), Managing 
open innovation technologies. Springer-Verlag, 35–52.
Hill, R. (2019, May 16). Use 12 steps to a successful cloud implementation. https://gcn.com/
cloud-infrastructure/2019/05/12-steps-to-a-successful-cloud-implementation/297931/.
Kendall, J. E., Kendall, K. E., & Germonprez, M. (2016). Game theory and open source contribution: 
Rationale behind corporate participation in open source software development. Journal of Organiza-
tional Computing and Electronic Commerce, 26(4), 323–343.
Kendall, K. E., Kendall, J. E., Germonprez, M., & Mathiassen, L. (2020). The third design space:  
A postcolonial perspective on corporate engagement with open source software communities. 
Information Systems Journal, 30(2), 369–402.
Kendall, J. E., Kendall, K. E., & Kong, S. (2006). Improving quality through the use of agile methods in 
systems development: People and values in the quest for quality. In E. W. Duggan and H. Reichgelt 
(Eds.), Measuring information systems delivery quality (pp. 201–222). Idea Group Publishing.
Kendall, K. E., Kong, S., & Kendall, J. E. (2010). The impact of agile methodologies on the quality of 
information systems: Factors shaping strategic adoption of agile practices. International Journal of 
Strategic Decision Sciences, 1(1), 41–56.
Laudon, K. C., & Laudon, J. P. (2018). Management information systems (15th ed.). Pearson.
Lee, G., & Cole, R. (2003). From a firm-based to a community-based model of knowledge creation: The 
case of the Linux kernel development. Organization Science, 14, 633–649.
Mehta, P. (2021). Pen testing (penetration testing). https://www.techtarget.com/searchsecurity/definition/
penetration-testing.
Mell, P., & Grance, T. (2011, September). SP 800-145: The NIST definition of cloud computing. https://
csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-145/final.
Open Source Technology Trends 2022 – What’s there for you? [Blog] (2022, January 13). https://www.
hiddenbrains.com/blog/open-source-technology-trends.html.
Project Management Institute. (2021). A guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK 
guide) (7th ed.). Project Management Institute.
Saroyan, S. (2017, July 20). How chatbots are helping ecommerce evolve. https://venturebeat.
com/2017/07/20/how-chatbots-are-helping-ecommerce-evolve/.
Sharma, M. (2021, September 21). Open source talent is in seriously high demand. https://www.techradar.
com/news/open-source-talent-is-in-seriously-high-demand.
SPDX Software Package Data Exchange. (n.d.). SPDX IDs. https://spdx.dev/ids.
SDLC VS. CDLC – Why more organizations are turning to the cloud. (2020, February 12). https://threat-
modeler.com/sdlc-vs-cdlc-why-more-organizations-are-turning-to-the-cloud/.
Visible Enterprise Products. (n.d.). www.visible.com/Products/index.htm.
What is GitHub and how do you use it? (n.d.). https://devmountain.com/?s=github.
What is open source? (2019, October 24). https://www.redhat.com/en/topics/open-source/
what-is-open-source.
Whitley, E. A., Willcocks, L. P., & Venters, W. (2013). Privacy and security in the cloud: A review of 
guidance and responses. Journal of International Technology and Information Management, 22(3), 
75–92.
Yourdon, E. (1989). Modern structured analysis. Prentice Hall.
Zhang, P., Carey, J., Te’eni, D., & Tremaine, M. (2005). Integrating human–computer interaction develop-
ment into the systems development life cycle: A methodology. Communications of the Association 
for Information Systems, 15, 512–543.


===== BOOK PAGE 25 =====

25
CHAPTER
2 
Understanding and Modeling 
Organizational Systems
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Once you have mastered the material in this chapter, you will be able to:
1 Understand that organizations are large systems composed of interrelated subsystems.
2 Depict systems graphically using context-level data flow diagrams and entity-relationship 
models.
3 Model “use cases” and understand how use case modeling helps systems analysis.
4 Recognize that different levels of management in organizations require different systems.
5 Appreciate how organizational culture influences the design of information systems.
To analyze and design appropriate information systems, systems analysts need to compre-
hend the organizations they work in as systems shaped through the interactions of three 
main forces: levels of management, design of organizations, and organizational cultures.
Organizations are large systems composed of interrelated subsystems. The subsys-
tems are influenced by three broad levels of management decision makers— operations, 
middle management, and strategic management—that cut horizontally across the 
 organizational system. To understand organizations properly, systems analysts start 
depicting them graphically as soon as they begin working with a company. These differ-
ent ways of seeing the organization include drawing context-level data flow diagrams and 
entity- relationship (E-R) models, developing use cases, and writing use case scenarios. 
 Collaborative design can help systems analysts include users from many parts of the 
organization. Organizational cultures and subcultures influence the way people in sub-
systems interrelate. Many technologies are available to support the creation of productive 
cultures and subcultures, including work-sanctioned social media sites such as Slack. 
These topics and their implications for information systems development are considered 
in this chapter.

