
===== BOOK PAGE 26 =====

26    PART I  •  SYSTEMS ANALYSIS FUNDAMENTALS
ORGANIZATIONS AS SYSTEMS
Organizations and their members are usefully conceptualized as systems designed to accomplish 
predetermined goals and objectives through people and other resources that they employ. Orga-
nizations are composed of smaller, interrelated systems (departments, units, divisions, and so on) 
that serve specialized functions. Typical functions include accounting, marketing, production, IT 
support, operations, legal, and management. Specialized functions (smaller systems) are eventu-
ally reintegrated through various ways to form an effective organizational whole.
The significance of conceptualizing organizations as complex systems is that systems prin-
ciples allow insight into how organizations work. To ascertain information requirements properly 
and to design appropriate information systems, it is of primary importance to understand the 
organization as a whole. All systems are composed of subsystems (which include information 
systems); therefore, when studying an organization, we also examine how smaller systems are 
involved and how they function.
Interrelatedness and Interdependence of Systems
All systems and subsystems are interrelated and interdependent. This fact has important impli-
cations both for organizations and for systems analysts who seek to help them better achieve their 
goals. When any element of a system is changed or eliminated, the rest of the system’s elements 
and subsystems are also significantly affected.
For example, suppose managers of an organization decide not to hire administrative assistants 
any longer and to replace their functions with networked PCs. This decision has the potential to 
significantly affect not only the administrative assistants and the managers but also all the orga-
nization’s members who built up communications networks with the now-departed assistants.
All systems process inputs from their environments. Processes change or transform inputs 
into outputs. Whenever you examine a system, check to see what is being changed or processed. 
If nothing is changed, you may not be identifying a process. Typical processes in systems include 
verifying, updating, and printing.
Another aspect of organizations as systems is that all systems are contained by boundar -
ies separating them from their environments. Organizational boundaries exist on a continuum 
ranging from extremely permeable to almost impermeable. To continue to adapt and survive, 
a humorous way. As implied in the video, as a systems analyst you 
need to research and ask questions about other cultures you work in 
and observe, follow local customs, and learn from other cultures to 
work with project teams and clients harmoniously. After you view 
the video, please reflect on the following questions:
1. How can you, as a systems analyst, learn about different 
global cultures?
2. How can you use observation to avoid being viewed as 
behaving inappropriately in a culture that is not your own?
3. What are some of the mistakes that employees made in 
the video when they first showed up at the meeting about 
global cultural awareness? How can mistakes like that be 
avoided?
4. What are some ways that you as a systems analyst can 
respect differences in global cultures through your actions 
(for example, during interactions in meetings or in your 
designs of systems, screens, or forms)?
SYSTEMS SCENARIO  
Increasing Organizational and Global Cultural Awareness
This chapter presents organizations and their members as systems, 
demonstrating how we can model systems. Organizational culture 
influences information systems design as does the broader culture. 
In this video, the topic of increasing our global cultural aware-
ness to make our systems projects run more easily is presented in 
To view the video for this scenario, 
see eText Chapter 2. 
Seven Dimensions/Boclips


===== BOOK PAGE 27 =====

CHAPTER 2  •  UNDERSTANDINg AND  MODELINg OR g ANIzATIONAL  S YSTEMS     27
organizations must be able first to import people, raw materials, and information through their 
boundaries (inputs) and then to exchange their finished products, services, or information with 
the outside world (outputs).
Feedback is one form of system control. As systems, all organizations use planning and 
control to manage their resources effectively. Figure 2.1 shows how system outputs are used as 
feedback that compares performance with goals. This comparison, in turn, helps managers formu-
late more specific goals as inputs. An example is a U.S. manufacturing company that produces red, 
white, and, blue weight-training sets as well as gunmetal-gray sets. The company finds that one  
year after the Summer Olympics, very few red, white, and blue sets are purchased. Production 
managers use this information as feedback to make decisions about what quantities of each color 
to produce. Feedback in this instance is useful for planning and control.
The ideal system, however, self-corrects or self-regulates in such a way that decisions on typi-
cal occurrences are not required. An example is a supply-chain system for production planning that 
considers current and projected demand and formulates a proposed solution as output. An Italian 
knitwear manufacturer that markets its clothing in the United States has just such a system. This 
company produces most of its sweaters in undyed white shades, uses its computerized inventory 
information system to find out what colors are selling best, and then dyes sweaters in hot-selling 
colors immediately before shipping them.
FIGURE 2.1
System outputs serve as feedback 
that compares performance with 
goals.
Goals
System
OutputsInputs
8. Personalizing the look and feel of the website for different 
customers
Zara Berry read the list and contemplated it for a while. “It 
is obvious that ecommerce is more complex than I thought,” she 
says. You can help the owners of Marathon Vitamin Shops in the 
following ways:
1. Make a list of the elements that are interrelated or interde-
pendent. Then write a paragraph stating why it is critical to 
monitor these elements closely.
2. Decide on the boundaries and ultimate scope of the system. 
Write a paragraph expressing an opinion on which elements 
are critical for Marathon Vitamin Shops and which elements 
can be explored later.
3. Suggest which elements should be handled in-house and 
which should be outsourced to another company that may 
be better able to handle the job. Justify your suggestions in 
two paragraphs, one for the in-house jobs and one for the 
outsourced tasks.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 2.1 
The E in Vitamin E Stands for Ecommerce
“Our retail shops and mail-order division are quite healthy,” 
says Zara Berry, one of the owners of Marathon Vitamin Shops, 
“but to be competitive, we must establish an ecommerce website.” 
Her father, a co-owner, exclaims, “I agree, but where do we start?” 
The elder Berry knew, of course, that it wasn’t a case of setting up 
a website and asking customers to order off the website. He identi-
fied eight different parts to ecommerce and realized that they were 
all part of a larger system. In other words, all the parts had to work 
together to create a strong package. His list of elements essential to 
ecommerce included the following:
1. Attracting customers to an ecommerce website
2. Informing customers about products and services  
offered
3. Allowing customers to customize products online
4. Completing transactions with customers
5. Accepting payment from customers in a variety of forms
6. Supporting customers after the sale via the website
7. Arranging for the delivery of goods and services


===== BOOK PAGE 28 =====

28    PART I  •  SYSTEMS ANALYSIS FUNDAMENTALS
Feedback is received from within the organization and from the outside environments around 
it. Anything external to an organization’s boundaries is an environment. Numerous environments, 
with varying degrees of stability, constitute the milieu in which organizations exist.
Among these environments are (1) the environment of the community in which the organi-
zation is physically located, which is shaped by the size of its population and its demographic 
profile, including factors such as education and average income; (2) the economic environment, 
influenced by market factors, including competition; (3) the political environment, controlled 
through state and local governments; and (4) the legal environment, issuing federal, state, regional, 
and local laws and guidelines. Although changes in environment status can be planned for, they 
often cannot be directly controlled by the organization.
Related and similar to the concept of external boundary permeability is the concept of internal 
openness or closedness of organizations. Openness and closedness also exist on a continuum 
because there is no such thing as an absolutely open or a completely closed organization.
Virtual Organizations and Virtual Teams
Not all organizations or parts of organizations are visible in a physical location. Entire organiza-
tions or units of organizations can now possess virtual components that permit them to change 
configurations to adapt to changing project or marketplace demands. Virtual enterprises use net-
works of computers and communications technology to bring people with specific skills together 
electronically to work on projects that are not physically located in the same place. Information 
technology enables coordination of these remote team members. Virtual teams often spring up 
in already-established organizations; in some instances, however, organizations of remote workers 
have been able to succeed without the traditional investment in a physical facility.
The potential benefits of virtual organizations include the possibility of reducing costs of 
physical facilities, more rapid response to customer needs, and helping virtual employees to 
achieve a work–life balance. Just how important it will be to meet the social needs of virtual work-
ers is still open to research and debate. One example of a need for tangible identification with a 
culture arose when students who were enrolled in an online virtual university, with no physical 
campus (or sports teams), kept requesting items such as sweatshirts, coffee mugs, and pennants 
with the virtual university’s logo imprinted on them. These items are meaningful cultural artifacts 
that traditional brick-and-mortar schools have long provided.
Many systems analysis and design teams are now able to work virtually and, in fact, many 
of them marked the path for other types of employees to follow in accomplishing work virtually. 
Some applications permit analysts who are providing technical assistance over the web to “see” 
the software and hardware configuration of the user requesting help, in this way creating an ad 
hoc virtual team composed of the analyst and the user. During the height of the global pandemic, 
when many workers could not meet in person, they were still able to work virtually or “remotely.” 
Some of these efforts were so successful in promoting work–life balance that workers opted for 
remote work or hybrid work as a preferred option to daily commutes to physical office buildings 
(Henderson 2021).
Taking a Systems Perspective
Taking a systems perspective allows systems analysts to start broadly clarifying and understanding 
the various businesses with which they will come into contact. It is important that members of 
subsystems realize that their work is interrelated. Notice in Figure 2.2 that the outputs from the 
production subsystems serve as inputs for marketing and that the outputs of marketing serve as 
new inputs for production. Neither subsystem can properly accomplish its goals without the other.
Problems occur when managers possess a different picture of the importance of their own 
functional subsystem. In Figure 2.3 you can see that the marketing manager’s personal perspec-
tive shows the business as driven by marketing, with all other functional areas interrelated but 
not of central importance. By the same token, the perspective of a production manager positions 
production at the center of the business, with all other functional areas driven by it.
The relative importance of functional areas as revealed in the personal perspectives of manag-
ers takes on added significance when managers rise to the top through the ranks, becoming strate-
gic managers. They can create problems if they overemphasize their prior functional information 
requirements in relation to the broader needs of the organization.


===== BOOK PAGE 29 =====

CHAPTER 2  •  UNDERSTANDINg AND  MODELINg OR g ANIzATIONAL  S YSTEMS     29
FIGURE 2.2
Outputs from one department 
serve as inputs for another, such 
that subsystems are interrelated.
Marketing
Production
Outputs from
marketing
become the inputs
for production.
Outputs from
production
become the inputs
for marketing.
FIGURE 2.3
A depiction of the personal 
 perspective of functional managers 
shows that they feature their own 
functional area as central to the 
organization.
DistributionProduction
MarketingPurchasing
How a Marketing Manager May View the Organization
Marketing
Finance
Production
Distribution
How a Production Manager May See the Organization
Finance
Purchasing
Enterprise Systems: Viewing the Organization as a System
Enterprise system, or enterprise resource planning (ERP), describes an integrated organization 
(enterprise) information system. Specifically, ERP is software that helps the flow of information 
between the functional areas in the organization. Rather than being developed in-house, the system 
is usually purchased from one of the software development companies well known for its ERP


===== BOOK PAGE 30 =====

30    PART I  •  SYSTEMS ANALYSIS FUNDAMENTALS
packages, such as SAP or Oracle Cloud. The product is then customized to fit the requirements 
of a particular company. Typically, the vendor requires commitment from the organization in 
terms of specialized user or analyst training. Over the last decade, ERP systems are moving to 
cloud computing.
ERP has taken root in many large companies and is spreading to small and medium-sized 
enterprises as well. Most of the lessons systems analysts have learned are applicable to implement-
ing enterprise systems. However, as an analyst you need to recognize and act on the similarities 
and differences between implementing networked information systems and implementing an ERP.
One of the major differences is that rather than redesigning business processes based on a 
logical analysis of those processes and how they support the business strategy, and then choosing 
the IT to support those processes, a large installation of ERP can reverse this by requiring the 
implementation of new business processes that are embedded in the technology provided. Often-
times you will be part of an internal systems team whose main job is to look after the interface 
between legacy systems and the ERP being installed.
Enterprise implementations are complex and intense endeavors that result in tremendous 
organization change. They can affect every aspect of the organization, including the design of 
employees’ work, the skills required to become competent in one’s job, and even the strategic 
positioning of the company. Implementing an ERP has become increasingly complex. Many issues 
present important hurdles to clear if the ERP installation is to be declared a success; these include 
user acceptance, integration with legacy systems, and the supply chain; upgrading functionality 
(and complexity) of ERP modules; reorganizing work life of users and decision makers; expanded 
reach across several organizations (as part of the IT supply chain); and strategic repositioning of 
the company adopting an ERP.
New research has shown that ERP implementations can result in making employees more 
effective and efficient two or three years after the installation, but it is in the planning and early 
stages of ERP that a deep analysis examines how the new enterprise system will affect the daily 
lives and jobs of employees involved in the new system (such as discussed in Chapter 14 on HCI 
and usability issues). ERP systems are best considered as real game changers when it comes to 
the job design of employees (including systems analysts) and as a moving force that can alter the 
strategic approaches to change that the organization takes.
DEPICTING SYSTEMS GRAPHICALLY
A system or subsystem as it exists within a corporate organization may be graphically depicted in 
several ways. The various graphical models show the boundaries of the system and the informa-
tion used in the system.
Systems and the Context-Level Data Flow Diagram
The first model is the context-level data flow diagram. Data flow diagrams focus on the data 
flowing into and out of the system and the processing (transforming) of the data. These basic 
components of every computer program can be described in detail and used to analyze a system 
for accuracy and completeness.
As shown in Figure 2.4, the context-level data flow diagram employs only three symbols: (1) 
a rectangle with rounded corners, (2) a square with two shaded edges, and (3) an arrow. Processes 
transform incoming data into outgoing information, and the content level has only one process, 
representing the entire system. The external entity represents any entity that supplies or receives 
information from the system but is not a part of the system. This entity may be a person, a group 
of people, a corporate position or department, or other systems. The lines that connect the external 
entities to the process are called data flows, and they represent movement of data.
An example of a context-level data flow diagram is found in Figure 2.5. This example repre-
sents the most basic elements of an airline reservation system and shows the system before (when 
a travel agent acted as intermediary) and after direct online booking was made possible. In the 
before diagram, the passenger (an entity) initiates a travel request (data flow). The context-level 
diagram doesn’t show enough detail to indicate exactly what happens (it isn’t supposed to), but we 
can see that the passenger’s preferences and the available flights are sent to the travel agent, which 
sends ticketing information back to the process. We can also see that the passenger reservation 
is sent to the airline. The second context-level diagram shows what happens when the passenger


===== BOOK PAGE 31 =====

CHAPTER 2  •  UNDERSTANDINg AND  MODELINg OR g ANIzATIONAL  S YSTEMS     31
FIGURE 2.4
The basic symbols of a data flow 
diagram.A process means that some action
or group of actions take place.
An entity is a person, group,
department, or any system that
either receives or originates
information or data.
A data ﬂow shows that information
is being passed from or to a 
process.
FIGURE 2.5
A context-level data flow diagram 
for an airline reservation system.
Context-level Diagram Including the Travel Agent as Intermediary
0
Airline
Travel Request
Ticketing Conﬁrmation
Ticketing Request
Travel
Agent
Available Flights
Airline
Reservation
System
Passenger
ReservationScheduled Flights
Passenger
Travel Request
Context-level Diagram Showing Direct Online Booking
Ticketing Conﬁrmation Airline
0
Airline
Reservation
System
Passenger Reservation
Scheduled Flights
Passenger


===== BOOK PAGE 32 =====

32    PART I  •  SYSTEMS ANALYSIS FUNDAMENTALS
books directly with an online system. The context-level data flow diagram serves as a good start-
ing point for drawing the use case diagram (discussed later in this chapter).
In Chapter 7, we will see that a data flow contains much information. For example, the passen-
ger reservation contains the passenger’s name, airline, flight number(s), date(s) of travel, price, seat-
ing preference, and so on. For now, however, we are concerned mainly with how a context-level data 
flow diagram defines the boundaries of the system. In the preceding example, only reservations are 
part of the process. Other decisions that the airline would make (for example, purchasing airplanes, 
changing schedules, pricing, and hiring additional flight crew members) are not part of this system.
The context-level data flow diagram is one way to show the scope of the system, or what 
is to be included in the system. The external entities are outside the scope and something over 
which the system has no control.
Systems and the Entity-Relationship Model
Another way a systems analyst can show the scope of a system and define proper system bound-
aries is to use an entity-relationship (E-R) model. The elements that make up an organizational 
system can be referred to as entities. An entity may be a person, a place, or a thing, such as a 
passenger on an airline, a destination, or a plane. Alternatively, an entity may be an event, such 
as the end of the month, a sales period, or a machine breakdown. A relationship is the association 
that describes the interaction among the entities.
There are many different conventions for drawing E-R diagrams (with names such as crow’s 
foot, arrow, or Bachman notation). In this book, we use crow’s foot notation. For now, we assume 
that an entity is a plain rectangular box.
Figure 2.6 illustrates a simple E-R diagram. Two entities are linked together by a line. In 
this example, the end of the line is marked with two short parallel marks (| |), signifying that this 
relationship is one-to-one. Thus, exactly one employee is assigned to one phone extension. No 
one shares the same phone extension in this office.
The red arrows are not part of the E-R diagram; they are present to demonstrate how to read 
the diagram. The phrase on the right side of the line is read from top to bottom as follows: “One 
EMPLOYEE is assigned to one PHONE EXTENSION.” On the left side, as you read from bottom 
to top, the arrow says, “One PHONE EXTENSION is listed for one EMPLOYEE.”
Figure 2.7 shows another relationship. The crow’s foot notation (>—+) is obvious on this 
diagram, and this particular example is a many-to-one example. As you read from left to right, 
the arrow signifies, “Many EMPLOYEES are members of a DEPARTMENT.” As you read from 
right to left, it implies, “One DEPARTMENT contains many EMPLOYEES.”
Notice that when a many-to-one relationship is present, the grammar changes from “is” to 
“are,” even though the singular “is” is written on the line. The crow’s foot and the single mark 
does not literally mean that this end of the relationship must be a mandatory “many.” Instead, they 
imply that this end could be anything from one to many.
Figure 2.8 elaborates on this scheme. Here we have listed a number of typical entity rela -
tionships. The first is a one-to-one relationship: “An EMPLOYEE is assigned to an OFFICE.”  
FIGURE 2.6
An E-R diagram showing a one-
to-one relationship.
Employee
Phone Extension
One
EMPLOYEE
is assignedto one
PHONE
EXTENSION.
One
PHONE
EXTENSIONis
listed
for one
EMPLOYEE.
is
listed
for
is
assigned
to


===== BOOK PAGE 33 =====

CHAPTER 2  •  UNDERSTANDINg AND  MODELINg OR g ANIzATIONAL  S YSTEMS     33
FIGURE 2.7
An E-R diagram showing a many-
to-one relationship.
Department
is a member of
contains
Employee
Many EMPLOYEES
are members of a
DEPARTMENT .
One DEPARTMENTcontains many
EMPLOYEES.
FIGURE 2.8
Examples of different types of 
relationships in E-R diagrams.
Passenger Destination
is assigned to
is occupied by
is assigned to
will be developed by
is undergoing
is being done to
is assigned to
is called on by
has
is assigned to
is ﬂying to
will be visited by
will serve
is served by
Employee Oﬃce
Systems Analyst
Distribution Center
Salesperson Customer
Home Oﬃce Employee
Machine
Project
Cargo Aircraft
Scheduled
Maintenance


===== BOOK PAGE 34 =====

34    PART I  •  SYSTEMS ANALYSIS FUNDAMENTALS
The second is a one-to-many relationship: “One CARGO AIRCRAFT will serve one or more 
DISTRIBUTION CENTERs.” The third one is slightly different because it has a circle at one end. 
It can be read as “A SYSTEMS ANALYST may be assigned to MANY PROJECTs,” meaning that 
the analyst can be assigned to no projects [that is what the circle (O), for zero, is for], one project, 
or many projects. Likewise, the circle (O) indicates that none is possible in the next relationship. 
Recall that the short mark means one. Therefore, we can read it as follows: “A MACHINE may 
or may not be undergoing SCHEDULED MAINTENANCE.” Notice that the line is written as “is 
undergoing,” but the end marks on the line indicate that either no maintenance (O) or maintenance 
(I) is actually going on.
The next relationship states, “One or many SALESPEOPLE (plural of SALESPERSON) are 
assigned to one or more CUSTOMERs.” It is the classic many-to-many relationship. The next 
relationship can be read as follows: “The HOME OFFICE can have one or many EMPLOYEEs” 
or “One or more EMPLOYEEs may or may not be assigned to the HOME OFFICE.” Once again, 
the I and O together imply a Boolean situation—in other words, one or zero.
The final relationship shown here can be read as, “Many PASSENGERs are flying to many 
DESTINATIONs.” Some people prefer this symbol [>—+] to indicate a mandatory “many” 
 condition. (Would it ever be possible to have only one passenger or only one destination?) Even 
so, some CASE tools such as Visible Analyst do not offer this possibility because the optional 
one-or-many condition as shown in the SALESPERSON–CUSTOMER relationship will do.
Up to now we have modeled all our relationships using one simple rectangle and a line. This 
method works well when we are examining the relationships of real things such as real people, 
places, and things. Sometimes, though, we create new items in the process of developing an 
information system. Some examples are invoices, receipts, files, and databases. When we want 
to describe how a person relates to a receipt, for example, it becomes convenient to indicate the 
receipt in a different way. There are three different types of entities: the fundamental entity, the 
associative entity, and the attributive entity. These are depicted in Figure 2.9.
An associative entity can exist only if it is connected to at least two other entities. For that 
reason, some call it a gerund, a junction, an intersection, or a concatenated entity. This wording 
makes sense because a receipt wouldn’t be necessary unless there were a customer and a sales-
person making the transaction.
Another type of entity is an attributive entity. When an analyst wants to show data that are 
completely dependent on the existence of a fundamental entity, an attributive entity should be 
used. For example, if a library has multiple copies of the same book, an attributive entity can be 
used to designate which copy of the book is being checked out. The attributive entity is useful for 
showing repeating groups of data. For example, suppose we are going to model the relationships 
that exist when a patron gets tickets to a concert or a show. The entities seem obvious at first: “a 
PATRON and a CONCERT/SHOW,” as shown in Figure 2.10. What sort of relationship exists?
At first glance, we see that the PATRON gets a reservation for a CONCERT/SHOW, and the 
CONCERT/SHOW can be said to have made a booking for a PATRON.
The process isn’t that simple, of course, and the E-R diagram need not be that simple either. 
The PATRON actually makes a RESERV ATION, as shown in Figure 2.11. The RESERV ATION 
FIGURE 2.9
Three different types of entities 
used in E-R diagrams.
Fundamental
Entity
Associative
Entity
Usually a real entity: a person, 
place, or thing
Something created that joins 
two entities
Something useful in describing
attributes, especially repeating
groups
Attributive
Entity


===== BOOK PAGE 35 =====

CHAPTER 2  •  UNDERSTANDINg AND  MODELINg OR g ANIzATIONAL  S YSTEMS     35
FIGURE 2.10
The first attempt at drawing an 
E-R diagram.
Patron
Concert/Show
makes a
reservation
for
makes
a
booking
for
Here is
my ﬁrst
attempt.
            Ken
is for a CONCERT/SHOW. The CONCERT/SHOW holds the RESERV ATION, and the 
 RESERV ATION is in the name of the PATRON. We added an associative entity here because 
a RESERV ATION was created due to the information system required to relate the PATRON and 
the CONCERT/SHOW.
Again, this process is quite simple, but because concerts and shows have many performancs, 
the E-R diagram is drawn once more in Figure 2.12. Here we add an attributive entity to han-
dle the many performances of the CONCERT/SHOW. In this case the RESERV ATION is made 
for a particular PERFORMANCE, and the PERFORMANCE is one of many that belong to a 
specific CONCERT/SHOW. In turn, the CONCERT/SHOW has many performances, and one 
 PERFORMANCE has a RESERV ATION that is in the name of a particular PATRON.
FIGURE 2.11
Improving the E-R diagram by 
adding an associative entry called 
RESERV ATION.
Concert/Show
makes
Patron
is in
the
name
of
is for
a
I’ve added
an associative
entity.
               Julie
has
Reservation


===== BOOK PAGE 36 =====

36    PART I  •  SYSTEMS ANALYSIS FUNDAMENTALS
To the right of this E-R diagram is a set of data attributes that make up each of the entities. 
Some entities may have attributes in common. The attributes that are underlined can be searched 
for. The attributes are referred to as keys and are discussed in Chapter 13.
Systems designers often use E-R diagrams to help model a file or a database. It is even more 
important, however, that a systems analyst understand both the entities and relationships in the 
organizational system very early. In sketching out some basic E-R diagrams, the analyst needs to:
1. List the entities in the organization to gain a better understanding of the organization.
2. Choose key entities to narrow the scope of the problem to a manageable and meaningful 
dimension.
3. Identify what the primary entity should be.
4. Confirm the results of steps 1 through 3 through other data-gathering methods (investiga-
tion, interviewing, administering questionnaires, observation, and prototyping), as dis-
cussed in Chapters 4 through 6.
It is critical that a systems analyst begin to draw E-R diagrams upon entering an organiza-
tion rather than waiting until the database needs to be designed. These E-R diagrams help the 
analyst understand what business the organization is actually in, determine the size and scope of 
FIGURE 2.12
A more complete E-R diagram, 
showing data attributes of the 
entities.
Concert/Show
has
has belongs to
Performance
makes
Patron
Reservation
is in
the
name
of
is
made
for
Patron-name
Patron-address
Patron-phone
Patron-credit-card
Reservation-number
Patron-name
Performance-number
Concert/show
Date
Time
Location
Price
Performance-number
Concert/show
Date
Time
Location
Price-options
Concert/show
Concert-details
Dates-of-event
Location


===== BOOK PAGE 37 =====

CHAPTER 2  •  UNDERSTANDINg AND  MODELINg OR g ANIzATIONAL  S YSTEMS     37
Microsoft Visio makes it easy for a systems analyst to draw E-R dia-
grams as well as most of the other diagrams found in this text, but it 
is available only for PCs. Mac users have an alternative, Omni Graffle 
Professional. OmniGraffle is easier to use than Microsoft Visio 
because its drag-and-drop interface is smoother and more intuitive.
It also features a “smart guide” that uses pop-up distance mark-
ers to help position the symbols in the correct places. Many sym-
bols, such as those used in E-R diagrams, are built in.
MAC APPEAL
FIGURE 2. MAC
OmniGraffle from The Omni Group is an easy-to-use and powerful drawing package. (Used by permission 
of the Omni Group.)
the problem, and discern whether the right problem is being addressed. The E-R diagrams need 
to be confirmed or revised as the data-gathering process takes place.
USE CASE MODELING
Originally introduced as a diagram for use in object-oriented unified modeling language (UML), 
use cases are now being used regardless of the approach to systems development. A use case 
 diagram can be used as part of the systems development life cycle (SDLC) approach or in 
agile modeling methodology. The word use is pronounced as a noun (“yoos”) rather than a verb 
(“yooz”). A use case model describes what a system does without describing how the system 
does it; that is, it is a logical model of the system. (Logical and conceptual models are further 
discussed in Chapter 7.) A use case model reflects the view of a system from the perspective of a 
user outside the system (that is, the system requirements).


===== BOOK PAGE 38 =====

38    PART I  •  SYSTEMS ANALYSIS FUNDAMENTALS
An analyst develops use cases in a cooperative effort with the business experts who help 
define the requirements of the system. A use case model provides an effective means of commu-
nication between the business team and the development team. A use case model partitions the 
way the system works into behaviors, services, and responses (the use cases) that are significant 
to the users of the system.
From the perspective of an actor (or user), a use case should produce something of value. 
Therefore, the analyst must determine what is important to the user and remember to include it in 
the use case diagram. For example, is entering a password something of value to the user? It may 
be included if the user has a concern about security or if it is critical to the success of the project.
Use Case Symbols
A use case diagram contains the actor and use case symbols, along with connecting lines. Actors 
are similar to external entities; they exist outside the system. The term actor refers to a particular 
role of a user of the system. For example, an actor may be an employee but also may be a customer 
at the company store. Even though it is the same person in the real world, it is represented as two 
different symbols on a use case diagram because the person interacts with the system in different 
roles. The actor exists outside the system and interacts with the system in a specific way. An actor 
can be a human, another system, or a device such as a keyboard or a web connection. Actors can 
initiate an instance of a use case. An actor may interact with one or more use cases, and a use case 
may involve one or more actors.
Actors may be divided into two groups. Primary actors supply data or receive information 
from the system. Some users directly interact with the system (system actors), but primary actors 
also may be businesspeople who do not directly interact with the system but have a stake in it. 
Primary actors are important because they are the people who use the system and can provide 
details on what the use case should do. They also can provide a list of goals and priorities. Sup-
porting actors (also called secondary actors) help to keep the system running or provide other 
services. These are the analysts, coders, people who run the help desk, and so on.
Sometimes it is useful to create an actor profile that lists the actors, their background, and 
their skills in a simple table format. This may be useful to understand how the actor interacts 
with the system. An example is an Order Processing Specialist. The profile would be, “A routine 
user of the software, familiar with minor features, order exceptions, and order customization.” It 
is also useful to list the actors and their goals and priorities. Each goal may become a use case.
A use case provides developers with a view of what the users want. It is free of technical or 
implementation details. We can think of a use case as a sequence of transactions in a system. The 
use case model is based on the interactions and relationships of individual use cases.
A use case always describes three things: an actor that initiates an event, the event that triggers 
a use case, and the use case that performs the actions triggered by the event. In a use case, an actor 
using the system initiates an event that begins a related series of interactions in the system. A use 
case documents a single transaction or event. An event is an input to the system that happens at a 
specific time and place and causes the system to do something.
It is better to create fewer use cases rather than more. Often queries and reports are not 
included; 20 use cases (and no more than 40 or 50) are sufficient for a large system. Use cases 
also may be nested, if needed. Some use cases use the verb manage to group use cases for adding, 
deleting, and changing into another, lower-level, use case diagram. You can include a use case 
on several diagrams, but the actual use case is defined only once in the repository. A use case is 
named with a verb and a noun.
Use Case Relationships
Active relationships are referred to as behavioral relationships and are used primarily in use case 
diagrams. There are four basic types of behavioral relationships: communicates, includes, extends, 
and generalizes. Notice that all these terms are action verbs. Figure 2.13 shows the arrows and 
lines used to diagram each of the four types of behavioral relationships. The four relationships 
are described next.
Communicates. The behavioral relationship communicates is used to connect an actor to a use case. 
Remember that the task of a use case is to give some sort of result that is beneficial to the actor in 
the system. Therefore, it is important to document these relationships between actors and use cases.


===== BOOK PAGE 39 =====

CHAPTER 2  •  UNDERSTANDINg AND  MODELINg OR g ANIzATIONAL  S YSTEMS     39
In our first example, a Student communicates with Enroll in Course. Examples of some compo-
nents of a student enrollment example are shown in the use case diagrams in Figure 2.14.
Includes. The includes relationship (also called the uses relationship) describes the situation in 
which a use case contains behavior that is common to more than one use case. In other words, the 
common use case is included in the other use cases. A dotted arrow that points to the common 
use case indicates the includes relationship. An example would be a use case Pay Student Fees 
that is included in Enroll in Course and Arrange Housing because in both cases students must 
pay their fees. Pay Student Fees may be used by several use cases. The arrow points toward the 
common use case.
Extends. The extends relationship describes the situation in which one use case possesses the 
behavior that allows the new use case to handle a variation or an exception from the basic use case. 
FIGURE 2.13
Four types of UML behavioral relationships and the arrows and lines used to represent the relationships.
Relationship
Communicates
Includes
Symbol
An actor is connected to a use case using a line with
no arrowheads.
A use case contains a behavior that is common to more than one
other use case. The arrow points to the common use case.
Generalizes One UML “thing” is more general than another “thing.”
The arrow points to the general “thing.”
Extends A different use case handles exceptions from the basic use case.
The arrow points from the extended to the basic use case.
Meaning
<< include >>
<< extend >>
FIGURE 2.14
Examples of use cases and behav-
ioral relationships for student 
enrollment.<< include >>
<< include >>
Enroll
in Course
Includes
Relationship
Arrange
Housing
Pay Student
Fees
<< extend >> Pay Student
Fees
Extends
Relationship
student states
amount of coverage
Student Health
Insurance
Communicates
Relationship
Enroll
in Course
Student
Part-time
Student
 Student
Generalizes
Relationship


===== BOOK PAGE 40 =====

40    PART I  •  SYSTEMS ANALYSIS FUNDAMENTALS
For example, the extended use case Student Health Insurance extends the basic use case Pay 
Student Fees. The arrow goes from the extended to the basic use case.
Generalizes. The generalizes relationship implies that one thing is more typical than the other 
thing. This relationship may exist between two actors or two use cases. For example, a Part-time 
Student generalizes a Student. Similarly, some of the university employees are professors. The 
arrow points to the general thing.
Developing System Scope
The scope of a system defines its boundaries: what is in scope—or inside the system—and what 
is out of scope. The project usually has a budget that helps to define scope, as well as start and 
end times. Actors are always outside the scope of the system. The communicates lines that con-
nect actors to the use cases are the boundaries and define the scope. Because a use case diagram 
is created early in the system’s life cycle, the budget, starting time, and ending time may change 
as the project progresses. As the analyst learns more about the system, the use case diagrams, use 
case, and scope may change.
Developing Use Case Diagrams
The primary use case consists of a standard flow of events in the system that describes a standard 
system behavior. The primary use case represents the normal, expected, and successful comple-
tion of the use case.
When diagramming a use case, start by asking the users to list everything the system should 
do for them. This can be done using interviews, in a joint application design session (as described 
in Chapter 4), or through other facilitated team sessions. The analyst may also use agile stories 
sessions (described in Chapter 6) to develop use cases. Write down who is involved with each use 
case and the responsibilities or services the use case must provide to actors or other systems. In 
the initial phases, this may be a partial list that is expanded in the later analysis phases. Use the 
following guidelines:
1. Review the business specifications and identify the actors involved.
2. Identify the high-level events and develop the primary use cases that describe those events 
and how the actors initiate them. Carefully examine the roles played by the actors to iden-
tify all the possible primary use cases initiated by each actor. Use cases with little or no 
user interaction do not have to be shown.
3. Review each primary use case to determine the possible variations of flow through the use 
case. From this analysis, establish the alternative paths. Because the flow of events is usu-
ally different in each case, look for activities that could succeed or fail. Also look for any 
branches in the use case logic in which different outcomes are possible.
If a context-level data flow diagram has been created, it can be a starting point for creating 
a use case. The external entities are potential actors. Then examine the data flow to determine 
whether it would initiate a use case or be produced by a use case.
Figure 2.15 is an example of a use case diagram representing a system used to plan a confer-
ence. The actors are the Conference Chair, responsible for planning and managing the confer -
ence, and the conference Participant, Speakers, a Keynote Speaker, Hotel Reservations, and a 
Caterer. Actors represent the role the user plays, and the Caterer may be either a hotel employee 
or an external catering service.
Both the Conference Chair and the Caterer are involved in planning meals and banquets. 
The Conference Chair is also responsible for arranging speakers. The Participant registers for 
the conference. Notice that the Reserve Room use case is involved in an includes relationship with 
the Arrange Speaker and Register for Conference use cases because both speakers and partici-
pants will need lodging. The Arrange Language Translation use case extends the Register for 
Conference use case because not all participants will require language translation services. The 
Speaker actor is a generalization of Keynote Speaker.
Developing Use Case Scenarios
Each use case has a description. We refer to the description as a use case scenario. As mentioned, 
the primary use case represents the standard flow of events in the system, and alternative paths


===== BOOK PAGE 41 =====

CHAPTER 2  •  UNDERSTANDINg AND  MODELINg OR g ANIzATIONAL  S YSTEMS     41
describe variations to the behavior. Use case scenarios may describe what happens if an item 
purchased is out of stock or if a credit card company rejects a customer’s requested purchase.
There is no standardized use case scenario format, so each organization is faced with speci-
fying what standards should be included. Often the use cases are documented using a template 
predetermined by the organization, which makes the use cases easier to read and provides stan-
dardized information for each use case in the model.
Use Case Levels
You may want to create use cases for different levels. One method (defined by Alistair Cockburn) 
uses the following altitude metaphors:
1. White is the highest level, like clouds. This is the enterprise level, and there may be only 
four to five use cases at this level for the entire organization. Examples might be to adver-
tise goods, sell goods to customers, manage inventory, manage the supply chain, and opti-
mize shipping.
2. Kite is lower than white but still a high level, providing an overview. The kite use case may 
be at the business unit or department level and is a summary of goals. Examples would be 
to register students, or, if working with a travel company, to make an airline, hotel, car, or 
cruise reservation.
3. Blue is at sea level and is customarily used to depict user goals. This level often has the 
greatest interest for users and is easiest for a business to understand. It is usually writ-
ten for a business activity, and each person should be able to do one blue-level activity in 
FIGURE 2.15
A use case diagram representing a 
system used to plan a conference.
Caterer
Conference
Chair
Hotel
Reservations
Arrange
Speaker
Plan
Catering
<< include >>
Reserve
Room
<< include >>
<< extend >>
Participant
Register for
Conference
Keynote
Speaker
Speaker
Arrange Language
Translation


===== BOOK PAGE 42 =====

42    PART I  •  SYSTEMS ANALYSIS FUNDAMENTALS
anywhere from 2 to 20 minutes. Examples are register a continuing student, add a new cus-
tomer, place an item in a shopping cart, and order checkout.
4. Indigo or fish is a use case that shows lots of detail, often at a functional or subfunctional 
level. Examples are choose a class, pay academic fees, look up the airport code for a given 
city, and produce a list of customers after entering a name.
5. Black or clam, like the bottom of the ocean, are the most detailed use cases, at a subfunc-
tion level. Examples might be to validate secure logon, add a new field using dynamic 
HTML, or use Ajax to update a web page in a small way.
A use case scenario example is shown in Figure 2.16. Some of the areas included are optional 
and may not be used by all organizations. The three main areas are:
1. An area header that contains case identifiers and initiators
2. Steps performed
3. A footer area that contains preconditions, assumptions, questions, and other information
FIGURE 2.16
A use case scenario is divided 
into three sections: identification 
and initiation; steps performed; 
and conditions, assumptions, and 
questions.
Use case name: Register for Conference UniqueID:    Conf RG 003
Area:
Actor(s):
Description:
Triggering Event:
Preconditions:
Postconditions:
Assumptions:
Steps Performed (Main Path)
Conference Planning
Participant has already registered and has created a user account.
Participant has a browser and a valid userID and password.
Participant has successfully registered for the conference.
Success Guarantee: Participant has registered for the conference and is enrolled in all selected sessions.
Minimum Guarantee: Participant was able to logon.
Requirements Met: Allow conference participants to be able to register for the conference using a secure website.
Outstanding Issues: How should a rejected credit card be handled?
Priority: High
Risk: Medium
Participant uses Conference Registration website, enters userID and password, and clicks the logon button.
  1. Participant logs in using the secure web server.
  2. Participant record is read and password is veriﬁed.
  3. Participant and session information is displayed on the 
     Registration web page.
  4. Participant enters information on the Registration Web form
      and clicks Submit button.
  5. Registration information is validated on the Web server.
  6. Registration Conﬁrmation page is displayed to conﬁrm 
      registration information.
  7. Credit card is charged for registration fees.
  8. Add Registration Journal record is written.
userID, Password
Participant Record, userID, Password
Participant Record, Session Record
Registration Web Form
Registration Web Form
Conﬁrmation Web Page
Secure Credit Card Web Page
Conﬁrmation Web Page
  9. Registration record is updated on the Registration Master. Conﬁrmation Web Page, Registration Record
10. Session record is updated for each selected session on
      the Session Master.
Conﬁrmation Web Page, Session Record
11. Participant record is updated for the participant on
      the Participant Master.
Conﬁrmation Web Page, Participant Record
12. Successful Registration Conﬁrmation web page is sent to
      the participant.
Registration Record Conﬁrmation Number
Trigger type:
Participant
Stakeholder: Conference Sponsor, Conference Speakers
Level: Blue
Allow conference participant to register online for the conference using a secure website.
Information for Steps
External Temporal


===== BOOK PAGE 43 =====

CHAPTER 2  •  UNDERSTANDINg AND  MODELINg OR g ANIzATIONAL  S YSTEMS     43
The first area, use case identifiers and initiators, orients the reader, and contains the use case 
name and a unique ID; the application area or system that this use case belongs to; the actors 
involved in the use case; and the stakeholders that have a high level of interest in the use case. 
Some stakeholders never interact directly with the system, such as the stockholders, the board of 
directors, or the sales manager. Each primary actor is a stakeholder but is not listed in the stake-
holder area. The first area should therefore include the level (blue, kite, and so on) and a brief 
description of what the use case accomplishes.
The header concludes with the initiating (triggering) event—that is, what caused the use case 
to start—and the type of trigger, either external or temporal. External events are those started by 
an actor, either a person or another system requesting information, such as an airline reservation 
system requesting flight information from an airline system. Temporal events are those that are 
triggered or started by time. Events occur at a specific time, such as sending an email about special 
offers once a week on a Sunday evening, sending bills on a specific day, or generating government 
statistics on a specified date every quarter.
The second area of the use case includes the steps performed and the information required 
for each of the steps. These statements represent the standard flow of events and the steps taken 
for the successful completion of the use case. It is desirable to write up a use case for the main 
path and then to write up one for each of the alternative paths separately rather than using 
IF . . . THEN . . . statements. Steps are numbered with an integer. The steps may come from 
a detailed interview with users or may be derived from agile modeling stories (as described in 
Chapter 6). These steps should be reviewed with the users for clarification.
The analyst should examine each of the steps and determine the information required for each 
step. If the analysts cannot determine the information, they should schedule a follow-up inter -
view with the user. Some use case descriptions include extensions or alternative scenarios, with 
the exceptions as additional sections following the standard flow of events. These are numbered 
with an integer, decimal point, and another integer, such as 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, and so on. These are 
steps that may or may not be used. Analysts and users can brainstorm what can go wrong with 
the main path, and they may uncover important details and conditions. It is necessary to work 
with the users to determine what to do when these conditions occur. This helps to detect errors 
earlier in the life cycle.
Figure 2.17 illustrates how logic and alternative scenarios can be included in the middle sec-
tion of a use case. In this airline example, notice that Step 1 is made up of smaller steps, many 
of which are preceded by an “if.” These are still on the main path but occur only if the condition 
is met. For example, if there are many airports that serve a city, then all the airports will be dis-
played. Extensions or alternate scenarios can appear here as well. For this airline, other scenarios 
include flight selection, seat selection, and meal selection. Use cases may even include iterative 
or looping steps.
The third area of the use case includes:
• Preconditions, or the condition of the system before the use case may be performed, which 
may be another use case. An example might be, “The viewer has successfully logged into 
the system,” or it might be the successful completion of another use case.
• Postconditions, or the state of the system after the use case has finished, which include 
output people have received, transmissions to other systems, and data that have been cre-
ated or updated. These relate to the goals or user requirements from a problem defini-
tion (described in Chapter 3) or to agile stories (described in Chapter 6).
• Assumptions made that would affect the method of the use case and that could stipulate 
required technology, such as the minimum technology requirements in a browser or even a 
specific or higher version of a browser. An assumption might be that cookies or JavaScript 
are enabled. The analyst must determine what to do if the assumptions are not met. When 
using Google Maps, JavaScript must be enabled; if it is not enabled, the map will not dis-
play. Netflix requires cookies. Good web pages will detect that an assumption has not been 
met and notify the viewer with a message, including information on how to turn on cookies 
or JavaScript for different browsers.
• Minimal guarantee, which is the minimum promised to the users. They may not be happy 
with this result, and it may be that nothing happens.


===== BOOK PAGE 44 =====

44    PART I  •  SYSTEMS ANALYSIS FUNDAMENTALS
FIGURE 2.17
Use cases can include conditional 
steps as well as extensions or 
alternative scenarios.
Steps Performed (Main Path) Information for Steps 
1. Enter departing and arriving airports, dates of travel Airport Locations 
    1.1. If an airport code is entered, display matching name, city, country 
    1.2. If a city is entered, ﬁnd all matching cities  
    1.3. Customer selects a city  
    1.4. If there is more than one airport for the city, display airports 
    1.5. Client selects an airport   
    1.6. Insert the airport code (3 characters)  
    1.7. Display the matching airport country, city, and airport name 
2. Find all matching ﬂights with available seats Flight Information 
3.  Customer selects ﬂight 
4. Customer logs on Customer Logon 
5. Customer selects passenger names Passenger Records 
6. Seating chart is displayed showing all available seats Plane Number, Seating Chart, Available Seats 
7. Customer selects seat(s) for each passenger 
8. Display conﬁrmation and credit card page 
9. Credit card veriﬁed  
10. Email conﬁrmation sent 
11. Airline reservation made  
Extensions or Alternative Scenarios
Flight Selection 
1.  A list of ﬂights displays 
2.  Customer selects a ﬂight 
3.   Request is sent to airline 
4.   Flight is already full 
Seat Selection 
1.  A list of ﬂights displays 
2.  Customer selects a ﬂight 
3.   Request is sent to airline 
4.   Seat reservations are retrieved 
5.   Seating chart is displayed 
6.   Customer cannot ﬁnd an acceptable seat 
Meal Selection for International Flights 
1. Customer selects meal from drop-down list Available Airline Meal List 
2. Record is updated with meal selection Customer Meal Record 
• Success guarantee, which is what would satisfy the users, and it is usually that the goal of 
the use case has been met.
• Any outstanding issues or questions that must be answered before implementation of the 
use case.
• An optional statement of priority of the use case, which may come from a problem defini-
tion or user requirements.
• An optional statement of risk involved in creating the use case.
The Requirements Met area links the use case to user requirements or objectives from a 
problem definition. Once you develop the use case scenarios, be sure to review your results with 
the business experts to verify and refine the use cases, if needed.
In the use case scenario called Register for Conference, the only actor involved is the 
 Participant. The overall area is Conference Planning, and the use case is triggered by the par-
ticipant logging on to the Registration web page. The Steps Performed area lists the sequence 
of events that must occur for a successful conference registration. Notice that the information


===== BOOK PAGE 45 =====

CHAPTER 2  •  UNDERSTANDINg AND  MODELINg OR g ANIzATIONAL  S YSTEMS     45
needed to perform each of the steps is listed on the right. This may include web pages and forms, 
as well as database tables and records.
The Preconditions area in the footer section of the use case scenario lists what must 
occur before the participant can register for a conference. In this example, the participant must 
have already signed up as a member of the society and have a valid userID and password. The 
 Postconditions area lists what has been accomplished by the use case. The Assumptions area lists 
any basic premises the analyst assumes are fulfilled by the actor beforehand. The Requirements 
Met area shows why this use case is important and necessary for the business area to be successful. 
Priority is an indication of which use cases should be developed first and which may be delayed. 
Risk is a rough assessment of whether there may be problems or difficulties developing the use 
case. In this case, the risk is medium because the registration use case requires a secure server 
and is accepting credit card information.
Creating Use Case Descriptions
Use the following four steps to create use case descriptions:
1. Use agile stories, problem definition objectives, user requirements, or a features list as a 
starting point.
2. Ask about the tasks that must be done to accomplish the transaction. Ask if the use case 
reads any data or updates any tables.
3. Find out if there are any iterative or looping actions.
4. The use case ends when the customer goal is complete.
Why Use Case Diagrams Are Helpful
No matter what method you use to develop your system (traditional SDLC methods, agile meth-
ods, or object-oriented methods), you will find that use cases are valuable. The use case diagrams 
identify all the actors in the problem domain, and a systems analyst can concentrate on what 
people want and need to use the system, extend their capabilities, and enjoy their interaction with 
technology. The main reasons for writing use cases are shown in Figure 2.18.
The actions that need to be completed are also clearly shown on the use case diagram. This 
not only makes it easy for the analyst to identify processes, but it also aids in communication with 
other analysts on the team and with business executives.
The use case scenario is worthwhile. A lot of the information the users impart to the analyst 
already takes the form of stories, and it is easy to capture the stories on a use case scenario form. 
The use case scenario always documents the triggering event so that an analyst can trace the steps 
that led to other use cases. Because the steps performed are noted, it is possible to employ use 
case scenarios to write logical processes.
Use case diagrams are becoming popular because of their simplicity and lack of techni-
cal detail. They are used to show the scope of a system, along with the major features of the 
system and the actors who work with those major features. The users see the system, and they 
can react to it and provide feedback. They also may help to determine whether to build or buy 
the software.
FIGURE 2.18
Reasons for writing use cases.
• Use cases effectively communicate systems requirements because the diagrams are 
 kept simple.
• Use cases allow people to tell stories.
• Use case stories make sense to nontechnical people.
• Use cases do not depend on a special language.
• Use cases can describe most functional requirements (such as interactions between
 actors and applications).
• Use cases can describe nonfunctional requirements (such as performance and 
 maintainability) through the use of stereotypes.
• Use cases help analysts deﬁne boundaries.
• Use cases can be traceable, allowing analysts to identify links between use cases and 
 other design and documentation tools.
Reasons for Writing Use Cases


===== BOOK PAGE 46 =====

46    PART I  •  SYSTEMS ANALYSIS FUNDAMENTALS
LEVELS OF MANAGEMENT
Management in organizations exists on three broad, horizontal levels: operational control, 
managerial planning and control (middle management), and strategic management, as shown in 
 Figure 2.19. Each level carries its own responsibilities, and all work toward achieving organization 
goals and objectives in their own ways.
Operational control forms the bottom tier of three-tiered management. Operations manag-
ers make decisions using predetermined rules that have predictable outcomes when implemented 
correctly. They make decisions that affect implementation in work scheduling, inventory control, 
shipping, receiving, and control of processes such as production. Operations managers oversee 
the operating details of the organization.
Middle management forms the second, or intermediate, tier of the three-tiered management 
system. Middle managers make short-term planning and control decisions about how resources 
may best be allocated to meet organizational objectives.
Strategic management is the third level of three-tiered management control. Strategic man-
agers look outward from the organization to the future, making decisions that will guide middle 
and operations managers in the months and years ahead.
Strategic managers work in a highly uncertain decision-making environment. There are sharp 
contrasts among the decision makers on many dimensions. For instance, strategic managers have 
multiple decision objectives, whereas operations managers have single ones. It is often difficult 
for high-level managers to identify problems, but it is easy for operations managers to do so. 
Strategic managers are faced with semistructured problems, whereas lower-level managers deal 
mostly with structured problems.
The alternative solutions to a problem facing strategic managers are often difficult to articu-
late, but the alternatives that operations managers work with are usually easy to enumerate. Stra-
tegic managers most often make one-time decisions, whereas the decisions made by operations 
managers tend to be repetitive.
Implications for Information Systems Development
Each of the three management levels has different implications for developing information sys-
tems. Some of the information requirements for managers are clear-cut, whereas others are fuzzy 
and overlapping.
Operations managers need internal information that is of a repetitive, low-level nature. They 
are highly dependent on information that captures current performance, and they are frequent users 
of online, real-time information resources. The need of operations managers for past performance 
information and periodic information is only moderate. They have little use for external informa-
tion that allows future projections.
On the next management level, middle managers need both short- and longer-term informa-
tion. Due to the troubleshooting nature of their jobs, middle managers experience extremely high 
FIGURE 2.19
Management in organizations 
exists on three horizontal levels: 
operational control, managerial 
planning and control, and strategic 
management.
Operational Control
Managerial
Planning and Control
Strategic
Management


===== BOOK PAGE 47 =====

CHAPTER 2  •  UNDERSTANDINg AND  MODELINg OR g ANIzATIONAL  S YSTEMS     47
needs for information in real time. To control properly, they also need current information on 
performance as measured against set standards. Middle managers are highly dependent on internal 
information. In contrast to operations managers, they have a high need for historical information, 
along with information that allows for the prediction of future events and simulation of numerous 
possible scenarios.
Strategic managers differ somewhat from both middle and operations managers in their 
information requirements. They are highly dependent on information from external sources that 
supply news of market trends and the strategies of competing corporations. Because the task of 
managing strategically demands projections into the uncertain future, strategic managers have a 
high need for information of a predictive nature and information that allows creation of many 
different “what if” scenarios. They also need accurate assessments of risk, including those posed 
to security of information systems. Strategic managers also exhibit strong needs for periodically 
reported information as they seek to adapt to fast-moving changes.
Collaborative Design
Collaborative design has many meanings in many fields, such as architecture, engineering, and 
information systems. In systems analysis and design, collaborative design means that stakehold-
ers who are external (outside clients) as well as those who are internal to the company follow 
processes to share in designing a system that meets their goals. Internally, collaborators can come 
from different levels of the organization’s hierarchy, including strategic, managerial, and opera-
tions, or from different departments of the same organizational level.
Researchers have found that many internal design collaborations rely on power relationships 
and information flows, which could be based in part on hierarchical relationships in the organiza-
tion (Levina 2005; Phelps 2012). Information systems projects may go more smoothly if those in 
the lower ranks of the organization, say graphics designers, are given the opportunity to use their 
expertise to create initial designs that are then examined by those who are not directly in graphic 
design but are higher up in the IT department or organization. Researchers also found that giving 
power to those who possess technical or strategic expertise in preference to graphic designers 
when using structured methods to begin a project may cause problems in the collaboration (Levina 
2005; Phelps 2012). For external collaborations, it is suggested that attention be paid to including 
Three weeks later, an assistant to Richard’s supervisor, Carol 
Vaness, appears. Richard is happy to see a familiar face, greeting 
her with, “Hi, Carol. What’s new?”
“Same old thing,” Carol sighs. “Well, I guess it isn’t old to 
you because you’re the newcomer. But I need all those pesky pink 
forms.”
Almost in shock, Richard exchanges looks with Harry, then 
mumbles, “You’re kidding, of course.”
Carol looks more serious than Richard ever thought possi-
ble, replying, “No joke. I summarize all the pink forms from all 
the brokers, and then my totals are compared with computerized 
stock purchase information. It’s part of our routine, three-month 
audit for transaction accuracy. My work depends on yours. Didn’t  
Ms. McCue explain that to you when you started?”
What systems concept did Richard and Harry ignore when toss-
ing out the pink forms? What are the possible ramifications for sys-
tems analysts if general systems concepts are ignored?
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 2.2 
Where There’s Carbon, There’s a Copy
“I don’t know what we do with the pink ones yet,” Richard 
 Russell admitted. “They’re part of a quadruplicate form that rips 
apart. All I know is that we keep them for the filing clerk, and he 
files them when he has time.”
Richard is a newly hired junior account executive for Carbon, 
Carbon & Rippy, a brokerage house. You are walking through the 
steps he takes in making a stock purchase “official” because his boss 
has asked you to streamline the process whereby stock purchase 
information is stored in the computer system and retrieved.
After you leave, Richard continues thinking about the pink 
forms. He tells his clerk, Harry Schultz, “In my two months here, I 
haven’t seen anyone use those. They take up my time and yours, not 
to mention all the filing space. Let’s pitch them.”
Richard and Harry proceed to open all the old files kept by 
Richard’s predecessor and throw out the filed pink forms, along with 
those accumulated but not yet filed. It takes hours, but they make a 
lot of room. “Definitely worth the time,” Richard reassures Harry.


===== BOOK PAGE 48 =====

48    PART I  •  SYSTEMS ANALYSIS FUNDAMENTALS
relevant stakeholders in appropriate information flows as well as emphasizing the relationships 
that are formed between external and internal participants.
ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
Organizational culture is an established area of research that has grown remarkably in the past 
decades. Just as it is appropriate to think of organizations as including many technologies, it is 
similarly appropriate to see them as hosts to multiple, often competing subcultures.
There is still little agreement on what precisely constitutes an organizational subculture. It is 
agreed, however, that competing subcultures may be in conflict, attempting to gain adherents to 
their vision of what the organization should be. Research is in progress to determine the effects 
of virtual organizations and virtual teams on the creation of subcultures when members do not 
share a physical workspace but share tasks.
Rather than think about culture as a whole, it is more useful to think about the researchable 
determinants of subcultures, such as shared verbal and nonverbal symbolism. Verbal symbolism 
includes shared language used to construct, convey, and preserve subcultural myths, metaphors, 
visions, and humor. Nonverbal symbolism includes shared artifacts, rites, and ceremonies; cloth-
ing of decision makers and workers; the use, placement, and decoration of offices; and rituals for 
celebrating members’ birthdays, promotions, and retirements.
Subcultures coexist within “official” organizational cultures. The officially sanctioned culture 
may prescribe a dress code, suitable ways to address superiors and coworkers, and proper ways to 
deal with the outside public. Subcultures may be powerful determinants of information require-
ments, availability, and use.
Organizational members may belong to one or more subcultures in the organization. Subcul-
tures may exert a powerful influence on member behavior, including sanctions for or against the 
use of information systems.
Understanding and recognizing predominant organizational subcultures may help a systems 
analyst overcome the resistance to change that arises when a new information system is installed. 
For example, the analyst might devise user training to address specific concerns of organizational 
subcultures.
of employees between accounting, production, and marketing so 
that we could share newly computerized inventory and sales figures 
across the organization. They claimed that committees such as that 
would cut down on needless duplication of output, and each func-
tional area would be better integrated with all the rest.”
Paul picks up the story, saying, “It was fair—oh, for a while—
and the employees shared information, but the reason you’re here is 
that the employees said they didn’t have time for committee meet-
ings and were uncomfortable sharing information with people from 
other departments who were further up the ladder than they were 
here at Pyramid.”
According to Paul and Ceil, what were the effects of installing 
a management information system at Pyramid, Inc. that required 
people to share information in ways that were not consistent with 
their structure? Propose some general ways to resolve this problem 
so Pyramid employees can still obtain the sales and inventory fig-
ures they need.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 2.3 
Pyramid Power
“We really look up to you,” says Paul LeGon. As a systems 
analyst, you have been invited to help Pyramid, Inc., a small, inde-
pendent book-publishing firm that specializes in paperback books 
outside the publishing mainstream.
Paul continues, “We deal with what some folks think are fringe 
topics. You know, pyramid power, end-of-the-world prophecies, 
and healthier living by thinking of the color pink. Sometimes when 
people see our books, they just shake their heads and say, ‘Tut—  
uncommon topic.’ But we’re not tied to any particular philosophy, 
and we’ve been very successful. So much so that because I’m 24, 
people call me the ‘boy king.’ ” Paul pauses to decipher your reaction.
Paul continues, “I’m at the top as president, and functional  
areas such as editorial, accounting, production, and marketing are 
under me.”
Paul’s assistant, Ceil Toom, who has been listening quietly up 
to now, barges in with her comments: “The last systems experts that 
did a project for us recommended the creation of liaison committees


===== BOOK PAGE 49 =====

CHAPTER 2  •  UNDERSTANDINg AND  MODELINg OR g ANIzATIONAL  S YSTEMS     49
Technology’s Impact on Culture
Technology is changing the culture of organizations and teams. Slack is an employer-sanctioned 
social media platform, or workplace-messaging app. Conversations between coworkers can be 
public, private, or something in between. Conversations can be put together as a group or as a 
person-to-person conversation. Channels can be devoted to seemingly trivial concerns such as 
popular snacks or employee cafeteria food, but its main purpose is to foster collaboration and com-
munication among officer workers. It is less formal than email and might be more popular with 
those in the millennial age group (“2022 State of the Digital Workplace” 2022). Slack can shape a 
culture, and it can become an office culture complete with programmable pranks, featuring fewer 
formal interactions than email and helping team members to avoid the difficulty of expressing 
themselves face-to-face in a meeting or even one to one.
Slack has both public and private channels. Public channels are open to all Slack team mem-
bers, and messages posted to them are archived (stored and kept) and are searchable by the entire 
work team. Private channels are circumscribed so that they are available to a limited number of 
team members and are joined via invitation only. You must be a private channel member to be 
able to view and search the contents of the private channel. Slack also has direct messages (DM) 
or group messages (group DMs) that are used for rapid, private messaging between two or more 
members of a work team. Their searchability depends on whether you are a recipient of the DM, 
in which case you can view and search the contents. Slack and many other technology-based tools 
can be very helpful in team communication.
Summary
There are three broad organizational fundamentals to consider when analyzing and designing information 
systems: the concept of organizations as systems, the various levels of management, and the overall orga-
nizational culture.
Organizations are complex systems composed of interrelated and interdependent subsystems. In addi-
tion, systems and subsystems are characterized by their internal environments on a continuum from open 
to closed. An open system allows free passage of resources (people, information, materials) through its 
boundaries; closed systems do not permit free flow of input or output. Organizations and teams also can 
be organized virtually, with remote members who are not in the same physical workspace connected elec-
tronically. Enterprise resource planning systems are integrated organization (enterprise) information systems 
developed with customized, proprietary software that help the flow of information between the functional 
areas in the organization.
There are many ways to graphically depict the system. An analyst should choose among these tools 
early on to get an overview of the system. These approaches include drawing context-level data flow dia-
grams, capturing relationships early on with E-R diagrams, and drawing use case diagrams or writing use 
case scenarios based on user stories. Using these diagrams and techniques at the beginning of analysis can 
help the analyst define the boundaries and scope of the system and can help bring into focus which people 
and systems are external to the system being developed.
E-R diagrams help a systems analyst understand the entities and relationships that comprise an organiza-
tional system. E-R diagrams can depict a one-to-one relationship, a one-to-many relationship, a many-to-one 
relationship, and a many-to-many relationship.
The three levels of managerial control are operational, middle management, and strategic. The time 
horizon of decision making is different for each level.
Organizational cultures and subcultures are important determinants of how people use information 
and information systems. By grounding information systems in the context of the organization as a larger 
system, it is possible to realize that numerous factors are important and should be considered when ascer -
taining information requirements and designing and implementing information systems. Technology such 
as the work-based social platform Slack can be used to create or reinforce elements of the organization’s 
culture or subculture.
Keywords and Phrases
actor
associative entity
attributive entity
closedness
collaborative design
context-level data flow diagram
crow’s foot notation
direct message (DM)


===== BOOK PAGE 50 =====

50    PART I  •  SYSTEMS ANALYSIS FUNDAMENTALS
enterprise resource planning (ERP)
enterprise systems
entity (fundamental entity)
entity-relationship (E-R) model
environment
feedback
interdependent
interrelatedness
middle management
openness
operational control
organizational boundaries
organizational culture
organizational subculture
scope of the system
Slack
strategic management
systems
use case
use case diagram
use case scenario
virtual enterprise
virtual organization
virtual team
Review Questions
1. What are the three groups of organizational fundamentals that carry implications for the development 
of information systems?
2. What is meant by saying that organizational subsystems are interrelated and interdependent?
3. Define the term organizational boundary.
4. What are the two main purposes of feedback in organizations?
5. Define openness in an organizational environment.
6. Define closedness in an organizational environment.
7. What is the difference between a traditional organization and a virtual one?
8. What are the potential benefits and a drawback of a virtual organization?
9. Give an example of how systems analysts could work with users as a virtual team.
10. What are enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems?
11. What is the main difference between doing business process analysis for ERP and for other types of 
systems?
12. What problems do analysts often encounter when they try to implement an ERP package?
13. What are the two symbols on a use case diagram, and what do they represent?
14. What is a use case scenario?
15. What are the three main parts of a use case scenario?
16. What are the four steps in creating use case descriptions?
17. What are the five altitude metaphors for describing use case on different levels? What do they represent?
18. What does a process represent on a context-level data flow diagram?
19. What is an entity on a data flow diagram?
20. What is meant by the term entity-relationship diagram?
21. What symbols are used to draw E-R diagrams?
22. List the types of E-R diagrams.
23. How do an entity, an associative entity, and an attributive entity differ?
24. List the three broad, horizontal levels of management in organizations.
25. Who should be involved in collaborative design of information systems?
26. How can understanding organizational subcultures help in the design of information systems?
27. How can systems analysis team members use Slack to build or reinforce an organizational culture or 
subculture?
Problems
1. “It’s hard to focus on what we want to achieve. I look at what our real competitors, the convenience 
stores, are doing and think we should copy that. Then a hundred customers come in, and I listen to 
each of them, and they say we should keep our little store the same, with friendly clerks and old-fash-
ioned cash registers. Then, when I pick up a copy of SuperMarket News, they say that the wave of the 
future is super grocery stores, with no individual prices marked, UPC scanners replacing clerks, and 
everything self serve. I’m pulled in so many directions I can’t really settle on a strategy for our gro-
cery store,” admits Addana Abara, owner and manager of Always Open Grocery Store.
In a paragraph, apply the concept of permeable organizational boundaries to analyze Addana’s 
problem in focusing on organization objectives.
2. Write seven sentences explaining the right-to-left relationships in Figure 2.8.
3. Draw an entity-relationship diagram of a patient–doctor relationship.


===== BOOK PAGE 51 =====

CHAPTER 2  •  UNDERSTANDINg AND  MODELINg OR g ANIzATIONAL  S YSTEMS     51
a. Which of the types of E-R diagrams is it?
b. In a sentence or two, explain why the patient–doctor relationship is diagrammed in this way.
4. You began drawing E-R diagrams soon after your entry into the health maintenance organization for 
which you’re designing a system. Your team member is skeptical about using E-R diagrams before 
the design of the database is begun.
a. In a paragraph, persuade your team member that early use of E-R diagrams is worthwhile.
b. Write a brief tutorial or create a brief Microsoft PowerPoint presentation explaining how to draw 
an E-R diagram to the project manager of the health maintenance organization. Define any techni-
cal terms to help them understand E-R diagrams.
5. Meilin is a decision maker for Ushi Plant-Based Foods. Because there are several suppliers of ingre-
dients and their prices fluctuate, she has come up with several different formulations for the variety 
of meat substitutes that she makes, depending on the availability of particular proteins from particular 
suppliers. She then orders ingredients accordingly twice a week. Even though she cannot predict 
when ingredients will become available at a particular price, her ordering of supplies can be consid-
ered routine.
a. On what level of management is Meilin working? Explain in a paragraph.
b. What attributes of her job would have to change before you would categorize her as working on a 
different level of management? List them.
6. Many of the people who work at Ushi’s (Problem 5) are extremely dedicated to Ushi’s and have 
devoted their lives to the company. Others feel that the company is behind the times and should use 
more sophisticated production systems, information systems, supply-chain management, and social 
media to make the company more competitive. Members of a third group feel that what they do is 
unappreciated. Describe the various subcultures in words. Assign them each a descriptive name based 
on their characterizations of the company.
7. Gabriela, a member of the human resources department at the Garcia Manufacturing Company, is 
constantly being asked by employees how much is taken out of their paychecks for insurance, taxes, 
medical, mandatory retirement, and voluntary retirement. “It takes up to a few hours every day,” 
says Gaby.
She would like the company to have a web system that would allow employees to use a secure 
logon to view the information. Gaby wants the system to interface with health and dental insurance 
companies to obtain the amount remaining in the employees’ medical accounts for the year. She would 
also like to obtain retirement amounts saved, along with investment results. Gabriela has a high regard 
for privacy and wants the system to have employees register and give permission to obtain financial 
amounts from the dental insurance and retirement companies. Draw a use case diagram representing 
the activities of this employee benefits system.
8. Write up a use case scenario for the use case diagram you constructed for Garcia Manufacturing.
9. At what level are you creating your use case for Garcia Manufacturing? Choose one of the five alti-
tude metaphors and explain why you chose it.
10. Create a context-level data flow diagram for the employee benefits system in Problem 7. Make any 
assumptions you need about the data to and from the central process.
a. Do you find this to be better than or not as good at explaining the system compared to the use case 
and use case scenarios? Explain your view in a paragraph.
b. Write a brief tutorial or create a short Microsoft PowerPoint presentation for Gabriela on how 
to draw context-level diagrams. Be sure to define any technical terms, as well as the reasons for 
drawing a context-level diagram early in your visits to Garcia Manufacturing.
11. Draw a use case and write up a use case scenario for getting two or three email accounts. Think about 
the steps that are needed to ensure security.
12. Draw a use case and write up a use case scenario for a user who is trying to logon to a secure site that 
they subscribe to, but who has forgotten their password.
13. Research work-sanctioned social media platforms that are available in your area. Choose one (Slack, 
for example) and write two paragraphs discussing (1) the benefits and (2) the drawbacks. Finally, in 
a paragraph, write an opinion about whether you would like to work in a company that uses Slack or 
another work-sanctioned social media solution, and state why or why not.
Group Projects
1. Break up into groups of five. Assign one person to act as the website designer, one to write copy 
for a company’s product, one to keep track of customer payments, one to monitor distribution, and 
one to satisfy customers who have questions about using the product. Then select a simple product 
(one that does not have too many versions). Good examples are a digital camera, a beach towel, a


===== BOOK PAGE 52 =====

52    PART I  •  SYSTEMS ANALYSIS FUNDAMENTALS
box of candy, or a specialty travel hat (rainproof or sunblocker). Now spend 20 minutes trying to 
explain to the website designer what to include on the website. Include ideas for product descriptions, 
 including photos or graphics and other content. Describe in about three paragraphs what experience 
your group had in coordinating. Elaborate on the interrelatedness of subsystems in the organization 
(your group).
2. In a small group, develop a use case and a use case scenario for making air, hotel, and car reserva-
tions for domestic travel.
3. Change your answer in Group Project 2 to include foreign travel. How do the use case and use case 
scenario change?
4. With your group, draw a context-level data flow diagram of your school’s or university’s registration 
system.
a. Label each entity and process.
b. Discuss with your group why there appear to be different ways to draw the diagram. Reach con-
sensus as a group about the best way to draw the diagram and defend your choice in a paragraph.
c. Now, working with your group, follow the appropriate steps for developing an E-R diagram and 
create one for your school or university registration system. Make sure your group labels the rela-
tionship you depict as to whether it is one-to-one, one-to-many, many-to-one, or many-to-many.
5. Research Slack, the work group social media platform, with your group.
a. In a paragraph, answer the questions: How does an organization subscribe to it? What are the ben-
efits? What are the drawbacks?
b. Have your group write two paragraphs: One on the benefits and one on the drawbacks of using 
work-sanctioned social media such as Slack.
c. In a third paragraph, conclude your write-up by offering a recommendation on whether or not to 
adopt Slack for your in-class group (assume that the necessary hardware and software resources 
are available to support it).
Selected Bibliography
2022 State of the Digital Workplace & Modern Intranet Report. (2020). https://www.akumina.com/
resources/2022-state-of-digital-workplace-report.
Bleeker, S. E. (1994). The virtual organization. Futurist, 28(2), 9–14.
Chen, P. (1976). The entity-relationship model—towards a unified view of data. ACM Transactions on 
Database Systems, 1, 9–36.
Ching, C., Holsapple, C. W., & Whinston, A. B. (1996). Toward IT support for coordination in network 
organizations. Information Management, 30(4), 179–199.
Cockburn, A. Use case icons. (n.d.). http://alistair.cockburn.us/Use+case+icons?version=8339&diff=8339
&with=6296.
Davis, G. B., & Olson, M. H. (1985). Management information systems, conceptual foundations, struc-
ture, and development (2nd ed.). McGraw-Hill.
Gaan, N. (2019). Collaborative tools and virtual team effectiveness: An inductive approach in India’s soft-
ware sector. In P. Seetharaman & J. Cranefield (Eds.), Information systems: Debates, applications 
and impacts (pp. 183–209). Routlege.
Galbraith, J. R. (1977) Organizational design. Addison-Wesley.
Grabski, S. V ., Leech, S. A., & Schmidt, P. J. (2011). A review of ERP research: A future agenda for 
accounting information systems. Journal of Information Systems, 25(1), 37–78.
Kähkönen, T., Alanne, A., Pekkola, S., & Smolander, K. (2017). Explaining the challenges in ERP devel-
opment networks with triggers, root causes, and consequences. Communications of the Association 
for Information Systems, 40, Article 11. http://aisel.aisnet.org/cais/vol40/iss1/11.
Kendall, K. E., Buffington, J. R., & Kendall, J. E. (1987). The relationship of organizational subcultures to 
DSS user satisfaction. Human Systems Management, 7(1), 31–39.
Kulak, D., & Guiney, E. (2004). Use cases: Requirement in context (2nd ed.). Addison-Wesley 
Professional.
Levina, N. (2005). Collaborating on multiparty information systems development projects: A collective 
reflection-in-action view. Information Systems Research, 16(2), 109–130.
Morris, M. G., & Venkatesh, V . (2010). Job characteristics and job satisfaction: Understanding the role of 
enterprise resource planning system implementation. MIS Quarterly, 34(1), 143–161.
Henderson, T. (2021, September 9). In-person workers are slow to return to jobs, data 
shows. https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/blogs/stateline/2021/09/09/
in-person-workers-are-slow-to-return-to-jobs-data-shows.


===== BOOK PAGE 53 =====

CHAPTER 2  •  UNDERSTANDINg AND  MODELINg OR g ANIzATIONAL  S YSTEMS     53
Phelps, A. F. (2012). The collective potential: A holistic approach to managing information flow in collab-
orative design and construction environments (Kindle ed.). Turning Point Press.
Warkentin, M., Sayeed, L., & Hightower, R. (1999). Virtual teams versus face-to-face teams: An explor-
atory study of a web-based conference system. In K. E. Kendall (Ed.), Emerging information tech-
nologies: Improving decisions, cooperation, and infrastructure (pp. 241–262). Sage.
Weilbach, L., Hattingh, M., & Pillay, K. (2021). Using design patterns to teach conceptual entity relation-
ship (ER) data modelling. In Y . M. Huang, C. F. Lai, & T. Rocha (Eds.), Innovative technologies and 
learning. Springer.
Yager, S. E. (1997). Everything’s coming up virtual. XRDS: Crossroads, 4(1), 20–24.


===== BOOK PAGE 54 =====

54
Project Management
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Once you have mastered the material in this chapter, you will be able to:
1 Understand how projects are initiated and selected.
2 Learn how to determine the feasibility of a proposed project.
3 Determine hardware and software needs and alternatives.
4 Take part in identifying, forecasting, and comparing costs and benefits.
5 Learn how to manage time and activities.
6 Demonstrate how to perform project scheduling.
7 Realize what it takes to control a project.
8 Know how to manage a project team.
9 Prepare an effective systems proposal, concentrating on both content and design.
Initiating projects, determining project feasibility, scheduling projects, estimating costs, 
budgeting, and planning, and then managing activities and team members for productivity 
are all important capabilities for a systems analyst to master. As such, they are considered 
project management fundamentals.
A systems project begins with problems or with opportunities for improvement in a 
business that come up as the organization adapts to change. The increasing popularity of 
ecommerce means that some fundamental changes are occurring as businesses either 
originate their enterprises on or move their internal operations and external relationships 
to the web. Changes that require a systems solution occur in the legal environment as well 
as in the industry’s environment. A systems analyst works with users to create a problem 
definition that reflects current business systems and concerns.
Once a project is suggested, the systems analyst works quickly with decision makers 
to determine whether the project is feasible. When a project is approved for a full systems 
study, the project activities are scheduled using tools such as Gantt charts and network 
diagrams (also called Program Evaluation and Review Technique [PERT] diagrams) so that 
the project can be completed on time. Part of ensuring the productivity of systems analysis 
team members is effectively managing their scheduled activities. This chapter is devoted 
to a discussion of project management fundamentals.
3 
CHAPTER

