
===== BOOK PAGE 55 =====

CHAPTER 3  •  PR ojECT  MAnA gEMEnT     55
PROJECT INITIATION
Systems projects are initiated by many different sources for a variety of reasons. Some of the 
projects suggested will survive various stages of evaluation to be worked on by you (or you and 
your team); others will not and should not get that far. Businesspeople suggest systems projects 
for two broad reasons: (1) because they experience problems that lend themselves to systems solu-
tions and (2) because they recognize opportunities for improvement through upgrading, altering, 
or installing new systems. Both situations can arise as an organization adapts to and copes with 
natural, evolutionary change.
Problems in an Organization
Managers do not like to conceive of their organization as having problems, let alone talk 
about those problems or share them with someone from outside. Good managers, however, 
realize that recognizing symptoms of problems or, at a later stage, diagnosing the problems 
themselves and then confronting them is imperative if the business is to keep functioning at 
its highest potential.
Problems surface in many different ways. In some instances, problems are uncovered because 
performance measures are not being met. Problems (or symptoms of problems) with processes 
that are visible in output and that could require the help of a systems analyst include excessive 
errors and work performed too slowly, incompletely, incorrectly, or not at all. Other symptoms 
of problems become evident when people do not meet baseline performance goals. Changes in 
employee behavior such as unusually high absenteeism, high job dissatisfaction, or high worker 
turnover should alert managers to potential problems. Any of these changes, alone or in combina-
tion, might be a sufficient reason to request the help of a systems analyst.
Although difficulties such as those just described occur in an organization, feedback on how 
well the organization is meeting intended goals may come from outside, in the form of complaints 
or suggestions from customers, vendors, or suppliers, as well as lost or unexpectedly low sales. 
This feedback from the external environment is extremely important and should not be ignored. 
A summary of symptoms of problems and approaches useful in problem detection is provided 
in Figure 3.1.
and monitoring performance along the way. The video introduction 
for this chapter emphasizes the importance of project management. 
After you view the video, please reflect on the following questions:
1. Why is it important to define the project’s objectives before 
trying to schedule activities?
2. While it is essential to schedule activities for a project to 
be completed in the time allowed, why is it also critical 
to consider the budget, people involved, and the promised 
deliverables of the system?
3. Communicating with your project team and the client is 
crucial to the success of the project. What are the important 
elements to consider in communicating about the project?
4. Scope creep is any deviation from the original scope of 
the project. Scope creep can cause delays in a project or 
put the entire project in jeopardy. How can scope creep be 
prevented?
SYSTEMS SCENARIO  
Strengthening Project Management
The topic of this chapter is project management. That includes 
defining the objectives of projects, analysis of alternatives, deter -
mining whether it is cost effective to complete a project, sched-
uling activities needed to complete a project, managing the team, 
To view the video for this scenario, 
see eText Chapter 3. 
Seven Dimensions/Boclips


===== BOOK PAGE 56 =====

56    PART I  •  SYSTEMS AnALYSIS FUnDAMEnTALS
Defining the Problem
Whether using the classic systems development life cycle (SDLC) approach or an object-oriented 
approach, an analyst first defines the problems and objectives of the system. These form the foun-
dation for determining what needs to be accomplished by the system.
A problem definition usually contains some sort of problem statement, summarized in a 
paragraph or two. This is followed by a series of issues or major independent pieces of the prob-
lem. The issues are followed by a series of objectives or goals that match the issues point by point. 
Issues are the current situation; objectives are the desired situation. The objectives may be very 
specific or worded as a general statement.
FIGURE 3.1
Checking output, observing 
employee behavior, and listening 
to feedback are all ways to help 
the analyst pinpoint systems prob-
lems and opportunities.
Check output against performance criteria.
Observe behavior of employees.
Listen to external feedback from:
   Vendors and service providers.
   Customers.
   Suppliers.
•  Too many errors
•  Work completed slowly
•  Work done incorrectly
•  Work done incompletely
•  Work not done at all
•  High absenteeism
•  High job dissatisfaction
•  High job turnover
Look for These Speciﬁc Signs:To Identify Problems
•  Complaints
•  Suggestions for improvement
•  Loss of sales
•  Lower sales
Agua concurs, saying, “It would be music to my ears, it would 
be really sweet if they would work with us to spot trends and 
changes—and then respond quickly.”
Stern’s, based in Blackpool, England, is a European beverage 
maker and the developer and producer of Sipps. Sipps is a sweet, fruit-
flavored, nonalcoholic, noncarbonated drink served chilled or with ice, 
and it is particularly popular when the weather is hot. Sipps has sold 
briskly in Europe and grown in popularity in the United States and 
Mexico since its introduction five years ago, but the company has had a 
difficult time adequately managing inventory and keeping up with U.S. 
customer demand, which is affected by seasonal temperature fluctua-
tions. Places with year-round, warm-temperature climates and lots of 
tourists (such as Florida and California) have large standing orders, but 
other areas of the country could benefit from a less cumbersome, more 
responsive order-placing process. A network of local distributors located 
throughout the United States, Canada, and Mexico distributes Sipps.
As one of the systems analysts assigned to work with the U.S. dis-
tributors of Sipps, you begin your analysis by listing some of the key 
symptoms and problems you have identified after studying the infor-
mation flows, ordering process, and inventory management and after 
interviewing Ms. Agua and her assistant. In a paragraph, describe 
which problems might indicate the need for a systems solution.
Note: This consulting opportunity is loosely based on Perez (1997), pp. 31 
and 34.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 3.1 
The Sweetest Sound I’ve Ever Sipped
S olana Agua, who represents one of the many U.S. distributors of 
the European soft drink Sipps, gazes unhappily at the weather app on 
her smartphone, which shows a map of the United States saturated 
with dark red, indicating that most of the country is experiencing 
an early spring heat wave, with no signs of a letup. Holding up the 
screen of her smartphone as she speaks to the assembled systems 
group, she says, “It’s the best thing that could happen to us, or at 
least it should be. But when we had to place our orders three months 
ago, we had no idea that this spring monster heat wave was going 
to devour the country this way!” Nodding her head toward a picture 
of their European production plant hung on the wall, she continues, 
“We need to be able to tell them when things are hot over here so we 
can get enough product. Otherwise, we’ll miss out every time. This 
happened two years ago, and it just about ruined us.
“Each of us distributors meets with our district managers to do 
three-month planning. When we agree, we upload our orders to 
European headquarters. They make their own adjustments, bottle 
the drinks, and then we get our modified orders about 9 to 15 weeks 
later. But we need ways to tell them what’s going on now. Why we 
even have some new superstores that are opening up here. They 
should know we have extra-high demand.”
Corky, her assistant, agrees, saying, “Yeah, they should at least 
look at our past sales around this time of year. Some springs are hot; 
others are just average.”


===== BOOK PAGE 57 =====

CHAPTER 3  •  PR ojECT  MAnA gEMEnT     57
Here are some examples of business questions relating to business objectives:
• What are the purposes of the organization?
• Is the organization a for-profit or nonprofit organization?
• Does the company plan to grow or expand?
• How do the organizational strategy and the IT strategy align?
• What is the organization’s attitude (culture) about technology?
• What is the organization’s budget for IT?
• Does the organization’s staff have the expertise?
Needless to say, a systems analyst needs to understand how a business works.
Finally, the problem definition contains requirements—the things that must be accomplished—
along with the possible solutions and the constraints that limit the development of the system. 
The requirements section may include security, usability, government requirements, and so on. 
Constraints often include the word not, indicating a limitation, and may contain budget restric-
tions or time limitations.
The problem definition is produced after completing interviews, observations, and document 
analysis with the users. The result of gathering this information is a wealth of facts and important 
opinions in need of summary. The first step in producing the problem definition is to find several 
points that may be included in one issue. Major points can be identified in the interview in a 
number of ways:
1. Users may identify an issue, a topic, or a theme that is repeated several times, sometimes 
by different people in several interviews.
2. Users may communicate using the same metaphors, such as saying the business is a jour-
ney, a war, a game, an organism, a machine, a family, and so on.
3. Users may tell a story to illustrate a problem that includes a beginning, a middle, and an 
ending; a hero; obstacles to overcome; and a successful (or hoped-for) resolution.
4. Users may speak at length on a topic.
5. Users may tell you outright, “This is a major problem.”
6. Users may communicate importance using body language or may speak emphatically on an 
issue.
7. The problem may be the first thing the user mentions.
Once the issues have been identified, the objectives must be stated. An analyst may have to 
do a follow-up interview to obtain more precise information about the objectives. After the objec-
tives are stated, the relative importance of the issues or objectives must be determined. If there 
are not enough funds to develop the complete system, the critical objectives must be completed 
first. Users are the best people to identify critical objectives (with the support of analysts) because 
users are domain experts in their business area and know how they work best with technologies in 
the organization. In addition to looking through data and interviewing people, a systems analyst 
should try to witness the problem firsthand.
A Problem Definition Example: Catherine’s Catering. Catherine’s Catering is a small business that 
caters meals, receptions, and banquets for business and social occasions such as luncheon meet-
ings and weddings. It was inspired by Catherine’s love of cooking and talent for preparing fine 
meals. At first it was a small company with a handful of employees working on small projects. 
Catherine met with customers to determine the number of guests, the types of meals, and other 
information necessary to cater an event. As her company’s reputation for creating superb food 
and the quality of the service began to blossom, the number of events started to increase. A new 
convention center built in the city and a prospering business community increased the number of 
catering events.
Catherine was able to manage the business using spreadsheets and word processing but had 
difficulty keeping up with the endless phone calls about what types of meals were available, 
changes to the number of guests attending the event, and the availability of special dietary items, 
such as vegan, vegetarian, low-fat, low-carbohydrate, gluten-free, and so on. Catherine hired a 
number of part-time employees to cook and cater the events; however, the complexity of sched-
uling personnel was becoming overwhelming to the new human resources manager. Catherine 
decided to hire an IT and business consulting company to help her address the problems her 
catering enterprise was facing.


===== BOOK PAGE 58 =====

58    PART I  •  SYSTEMS AnALYSIS FUnDAMEnTALS
After performing interviews and observing a number of key staff, the consultants found the 
following concerns:
1. The chef ordered supplies (produce, meat, and so on) from suppliers for each event. The 
suppliers would provide discounts if greater quantities were ordered at a single time for all 
events occurring in a given time frame.
2. Customers often called to change the number of guests for an event, with some changes 
made only one or two days before the event was to occur.
3. It was too time-consuming for Catherine and her staff to handle each request for catering, 
with about 60 percent of the calls resulting in a contract.
4. Conflicts in employee schedules were occurring, and some events were understaffed. 
Complaints about the timeliness of service were becoming more frequent.
5. Catherine does not have any summary information about the number of events and types of 
meals. It would be helpful to have trend information to help guide customers in their choice 
of meals.
6. Events that include service for sit-down meals are often held in banquet rooms and at other 
meeting halls. There are problems with scheduling sufficient wait staff and responding to 
changes in the number of guests.
The problem definition is shown in Figure 3.2. Notice the weights on the right, representing 
an average of the weights assigned by each employee. Objectives match the issues. Each objective 
is used to create user requirements.
User requirements are then used to create either use cases and a use case diagram or processes 
on a data flow diagram. Each objective may have one or more user requirements, several objec-
tives may lead to the creation of one or perhaps no use cases (use cases are not often created for 
simple reports), or each requirement may lead to the creation of one data flow diagram process. 
The user requirements for Catherine’s Catering are to:
1. Create a dynamic website to allow current and potential clients to view and obtain pricing 
information for a variety of different products.
2. Allow current and potential clients to submit a request with their catering choices, with the 
request routed to an account manager.
3. Add clients to the client database, assigning each a userID and a password for access to 
their projects.
4. Create a website for clients to view and update the number of guests for an event  
and restrict changes in the number of guests when the event is less than five days in  
the future.
5. Obtain or create software to communicate directly with event facility personnel.
6. Develop or purchase a human resources system for scheduling part-time employees  
that allows management to add employees and schedule them using multiple  
constraints.
7. Provide queries or reports with summary information.
Each requirement may be used to create a preliminary test plan. Few details are available at 
this time, so the test plan will be revised as the project progresses.
A simple test plan for Catherine’s Catering is:
1. Design test data to allow clients to view each different type of product.
2. Test to ensure that a catering request has been entered with valid data, as well as each pos-
sible condition of invalid data. (Data are defined later.) Ensure that the request is routed to 
the appropriate account manager.
3. Test that all data fields pass all validation criteria for each field. Test good data to ensure 
that clients are added to the client database and that a userID and a password are correctly 
assigned.
4. Create a test plan that will confirm that clients are able to view event information. Test that 
updates may not be made within five days of the event. Design test data to ensure correct 
updating of the number of guests for an event.
5. Test that the software works correctly for communicating directly with event facility 
personnel.


===== BOOK PAGE 59 =====

CHAPTER 3  •  PR ojECT  MAnA gEMEnT     59
6. Test the human resources system for scheduling part-time employees, checking that 
employees have been correctly added and that all invalid values for each field are detected 
and reported. Check scheduling software for valid updates and each invalid entry.
7. Check that all queries and reports work correctly and contain the correct summary 
information.
Selection of Projects
Projects come from many different sources and for many reasons. Not all should be selected for 
further study. You must be clear in your own mind about the reasons for recommending a systems 
study on a project that seems to address a problem or could bring about improvement. Consider the 
motivation that prompts a proposal on the project. You need to be sure that the project under con-
sideration is not being proposed simply to enhance your own political reputation or power or that 
of the person or group proposing it because there is a high probability that such a project will be 
ill conceived and eventually poorly accepted.
As outlined in Chapter 2, prospective projects need to be examined from a systems perspective, 
considering the impact of the proposed change on the entire organization. Recall that the various 
FIGURE 3.2
Problem definition for Catherine’s 
Catering developed with the help 
of users.
Problem Deﬁnition
Catherine’s Catering is experiencing problems with handling the number of routine calls with customers, as well as 
coordinating with external partners such as suppliers and meeting facilities. The growth in the number of part-time 
staﬀ is leading to scheduling conﬂicts and understaﬀed events.
Issues
1.  Customer contact takes an inordinate amount of time for routine questions.
2.  Managing part-time employees is time consuming and leads to scheduling errors.
3.  It is diﬃcult to accommodate last-minute changes for events.
4.  Supplies are ordered for each event. Often shipments are received several times a day.
5.  There are often problems communicating changes to event facilities.
6.  There is little historical information about customers and meals.
Objectives
1.  Provide a web system for customers to obtain pricing information and place orders.
2.  Create or purchase a human resources system with a scheduling component.
3.  After customers have signed an event contract, provide them with Web access to their 
     account and a means for them to update the number of guests. Notify management of changes.
4.  Provide a means to determine overall quantities of supplies for events occurring within a 
     concurrent time frame.
5.  Provide a system for communicating changes to key personnel at event facilities.
6.  Store all event data and make summary information available in a variety of formats.
Requirements
1.  The system must be secure.
2.  Feedback must be entered by event managers at the close of each event.
3.  There must be a means for event facilities to change their contact person.
4.  The system must be easy to use by nontechnical people.
Constraints
1.  Development costs must not exceed $50,000.
2.  The initial website for customer orders must be ready by March 1 to accommodate requests 
     for graduation parties and weddings.
 
10
9
7
6
5
3
Weight


===== BOOK PAGE 60 =====

60    PART I  •  SYSTEMS AnALYSIS FUnDAMEnTALS
subsystems of an organization are interrelated and interdependent, so a change to one subsystem 
might affect all the others. Even though the decision makers directly involved ultimately set the 
boundaries for a systems project, a systems project cannot be contemplated or selected in isolation 
from the rest of the organization.
Beyond these general considerations are five specific questions that need to be asked regarding 
project selection:
1. Does it have backing from management?
2. Is the timing of the project commitment appropriate?
3. Is it possible to improve attainment of strategic organization goals?
4. Is it practical in terms of resources for the systems analyst and organization?
5. Is it a worthwhile project compared with other ways the organization could invest 
resources?
First and foremost is backing from management. Absolutely nothing can be accomplished 
without the endorsement of the people who will eventually foot the bill. This statement does not 
mean that you lack influence in directing the project or that people other than management can’t 
be included; however, management backing is essential.
Another important criterion for project selection is timing for you and the organization. Ask 
yourself and the others who are involved whether the business is presently capable of making a 
time commitment for installation of new systems or improvement to existing ones. You must also 
be able to commit all or a portion of your time for the duration.
A third criterion is the possibility of improving attainment of strategic organization goals 
such as (1) improving corporate profits, (2) supporting the competitive strategy of the organiza-
tion, (3) improving cooperation with vendors and partners, (4) improving internal operations 
support so that goods and services are produced efficiently and effectively, (5) improving inter -
nal decision support so that decisions are more effective, (6) improving customer service, and 
(7) improving employee morale. The project should put the organization on target, not deter it 
from its ultimate goals.
A fourth criterion is selecting a project that is practicable in terms of your resources and capa-
bilities as well as those of the business. Some projects will not fall within your realm of expertise, 
and you must be able to recognize them.
Finally, you need to come to a basic agreement with the organization about the worthiness 
of the systems project relative to any other possible project being considered. There are many 
possibilities for improvements, including (1) speeding up a process, (2) streamlining a process 
through the elimination of unnecessary or duplicated steps, (3) combining processes, (4) reducing 
errors in input through changes of forms and display screens, (5) moving key systems to the cloud, 
(6) reducing redundant storage, (7) reducing redundant output, and (8) improving integration of 
systems and subsystems. Remember that when a business commits to one project, it is commit-
ting resources that thereby become unavailable for other projects. It is useful to view all possible 
projects as competing for the business resources of time, money, and people.
DETERMINING FEASIBILITY
Once the number of projects has been narrowed according to the criteria discussed previously, it is 
still necessary to determine whether the selected projects are feasible. Our definition of feasibility 
goes much deeper than the common usage of the term. Systems project feasibility is assessed in 
three principal ways: operationally, technically, and economically. A feasibility study is not a full-
blown systems study. Rather, a feasibility study is used to gather broad data for the members of 
management that enables them to decide whether to proceed with a systems study.
Determining Whether It Is Possible
After an analyst determines reasonable objectives for a project, the analyst needs to deter -
mine whether it is possible for the organization and its members to see the project through to 
completion. Generally, the process of feasibility assessment is effective in screening out projects 
that are inconsistent with the business’s strategic objectives, that are technically impossible, or that 
have no economic merit.


===== BOOK PAGE 61 =====

CHAPTER 3  •  PR ojECT  MAnA gEMEnT     61
Although it is painstaking, studying feasibility is worthwhile because it saves businesses and 
systems analysts time and money. In order for an analyst to recommend further development, a 
project must show that it is feasible technically, economically, and operationally (see Figure 3.3).
Technical Feasibility. An analyst must find out whether it is possible to develop a new system 
given the current technical resources. If not, can the system be upgraded or added to in a manner 
that fulfills the request under consideration? If existing systems cannot be added to or upgraded, 
the next question becomes whether there is technology in existence that meets the specifications.
At the same time, the analyst can ask whether the organization has staff who are techni-
cally proficient to accomplish the objectives. If not, can the organization hire additional coders, 
testers, experts, or others who may have different coding skills from theirs, or perhaps outsource 
the project completely? In addition, are software packages available that can accomplish the 
objectives, and how significantly does that software need to be customized for the organization?
Economic Feasibility. Economic feasibility is the second part of resource determination. The 
basic resources to consider are your time and that of the systems analysis team, the cost of doing 
a full systems study (including the time of employees you will be working with), the cost of 
the business employee time, the estimated cost of hardware, and the estimated cost of software, 
software development, or software customization.
The organization must be able to see the value of the investment it is pondering before 
committing to an entire systems study. If short-term costs are not overshadowed by long-term 
gains or if the project produces no immediate reduction in operating costs, the system is not 
economically feasible and should not proceed further.
Operational Feasibility. Suppose for a moment that technical and economic resources are both 
judged adequate. The systems analyst must now consider the operational feasibility  of the 
requested project. Operational feasibility is dependent on the human resources available for 
the project and involves forecasting whether the system will operate and be used once it is put 
into service.
If users are virtually wed to the present system, see no problems with it, and generally are not 
involved in requesting a new system, resistance to implementing the new system will be strong. 
The new system has a low chance of becoming operational.
Alternatively, if users themselves have expressed a need for a system that is operational more 
of the time and is more efficient and more accessible, chances are better that the requested system 
will eventually be used. Much of the art of determining operational feasibility rests with the user 
interfaces that are chosen, as we see in Chapter 14.
Estimating Workloads
The next step in ascertaining hardware needs is to estimate workloads. Thus, systems analysts 
formulate numbers that represent both current and projected workloads for the system so that any 
hardware obtained will be capable of handling current and future workloads.
FIGURE 3.3
The three key elements of 
feasibility are technical, economic, 
and operational feasibility.
The Three Key Elements of Feasibility
       Technical Feasibility
              Add on to present system
              Technology available to meet users’ needs
       Economic Feasibility
              Systems analysts’ time
              Cost of systems study
              Cost of employees’ time for study
              Estimated cost of hardware
              Cost of packaged software or software development
      Operational Feasibility
              Whether the system will operate when put in service
              Whether the system will be used


===== BOOK PAGE 62 =====

62    PART I  •  SYSTEMS AnALYSIS FUnDAMEnTALS
If estimates are accurate, the business should not have to replace hardware solely due to 
unforeseen growth in system use. (Other events, however, such as superior technological innova-
tions, may dictate hardware replacement if the business wants to maintain its competitive edge.)
Out of necessity, workloads are sampled rather than actually put through several computer 
systems. The guidelines given in Chapter 5 can be of use here because in workload sampling 
the systems analyst is taking a sample of necessary tasks and the computer resources required to 
complete them.
Figure 3.4 compares the time required by existing and proposed information systems (IS) that 
are supposed to handle a given workload. Notice that the company is currently using a legacy com-
puter system to prepare a summary of shipments to its distribution warehouses, and a web-based 
dashboard is being suggested. The workload comparison looks at when and how each process is 
done, how much human time is required, and how much computer time is needed. Notice that 
the newly proposed system should reduce the required human and computer time significantly.
ASCERTAINING HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE NEEDS
Assessing technical feasibility includes evaluating the ability of computer hardware and software 
to handle workloads adequately. Figure 3.5 shows the steps a systems analyst takes in ascertaining 
hardware and software needs. First, all current computer hardware the organization owns must be 
inventoried to discover what is on hand and what is usable.
A systems analyst needs to work with users to determine what hardware will be 
needed. Hardware determinations can be made only in conjunction with determining human 
FIGURE 3.4
Comparisons of workloads 
between existing and proposed 
systems.
Compare performance of
distribution warehouses
by running the summary  
program.
Computer programs are
run when needed; processing 
is done from the workstation.
Updates occur immediately;
processing is done online.
Distribution manager Distribution manager
Daily:
Enter shipments on Excel 
spreadsheet; verify accuracy
of spreadsheet manually; and
media.
then write ﬁles to backup
Monthly:
Run program that
summarizes daily records
and prints report; get 
report and make evaluations.
Daily:
Enter shipments on the
Web-based system using
automatically backed up
drop-down boxes. Data are 
to remote location.
Monthly:
Compare warehouses online
using the performance
dashboard; print only if
needed.
Daily: 20 minutes Daily: 10 minutes
Monthly: 30 minutes Monthly: 10 minutes
Daily: 20 minutes Daily: 10 minutes
Monthly: 30 minutes Monthly: 10 minutes
Task
Method
Personnel
When and how
Human time
requirements
Computer time
requirements
Compare performance of
distribution warehouses
on the Web-based
dashboard.
Existing System Proposed System


===== BOOK PAGE 63 =====

CHAPTER 3  •  PR ojECT  MAnA gEMEnT     63
FIGURE 3.5
Steps in choosing hardware and 
software.
Choose Hardware
Vendor
Choose Cloud
Service Provider
Design and
Develop In-house
Choose SaaS
Provider
Choose Software
Manufacturer
Buy New
Hardware
Choose
COTS
Software
Use SaaS
Provider
Create Your
Own Software
Use Cloud
Services
Estimate
Workloads
Inventory
Computer
Hardware
Evaluate
Hardware
Alternatives
Evaluate
Software
Alternatives
information requirements. Knowledge of the organization structure and how users interact with 
technologies in an organization setting also can be helpful in hardware decisions. Only when 
systems analysts, users, and management have a good grasp of what kinds of tasks must be 
accomplished can hardware options be considered.
Inventorying Computer Hardware
A systems analyst needs to inventory what computer hardware is already available in the organi-
zation. As will become apparent, some of the hardware options involve expanding or recycling 
current hardware, so it is important to know what is on hand.
If an updated computer hardware inventory is unavailable, the systems analyst needs to set 
one up quickly and carry through on it. It is important to know the following:
1. The type of equipment, including model number and manufacturer
2. The operational status of the equipment, such as on order, operating, in storage, or in need 
of repair


===== BOOK PAGE 64 =====

64    PART I  •  SYSTEMS AnALYSIS FUnDAMEnTALS
3. The estimated age of the equipment
4. The projected life of the equipment
5. The physical location of the equipment
6. The department or person considered responsible for the equipment
7. The financial arrangement for the equipment, such as owned, leased, or rented
Ascertaining the current hardware available will result in a sounder decision-making process 
when hardware decisions are finally made because much of the guesswork about what exists will 
have been eliminated. Through your earlier interviews with users, user surveys, and research of 
archival data, you will already know the number of people available for data processing as well 
as their skills and capabilities. Use this information to project how well the staffing needs for new 
hardware can be met.
Evaluating Computer Hardware for Purchase
Evaluating new computer hardware is the shared responsibility of management, users, and systems 
analysts. Although vendors will be supplying details about their offerings, analysts need to over-
see the evaluation process personally because they will have the best interests of the business at 
heart. In addition, systems analysts may have to educate users and management about the general 
advantages and disadvantages of hardware before they can capably evaluate it.
Based on the current inventory of computer equipment and adequate estimates of current and 
forecasted workloads, the next step in the process is to consider the kinds of equipment available 
that appear to meet projected needs. Information from vendors on possible systems and system 
configurations becomes more pertinent at this stage and should be reviewed with management 
and users.
In addition, workloads can be simulated and run on different systems, including those already 
used in the organization. This process is referred to as benchmarking.
Criteria that the systems analysts and users should use to evaluate performance of different 
systems hardware include the following:
1. The time required for average transactions (including how long it takes to input data and 
how long it takes to receive output)
2. The total volume capacity of the system (how much can be processed at the same time 
before a problem arises)
3. The idle time of the CPU or network
4. The size of the memory provided
Some criteria will be shown in formal demonstrations; some cannot be simulated and must 
be gleaned from manufacturers’ or service providers’ specifications. It is important to be clear 
about the required and desired functions before getting too wrapped up in vendors’ claims during 
demonstrations.
Once functional requirements are known and the products currently available are compre-
hended and compared with what already exists in the organization, the systems analysts in con-
junction with users and management can make decisions about whether obtaining new hardware 
is necessary.
Advantages of Buying Computer Hardware. If the organization purchases its own computers, it 
will have full control regarding the type of hardware and software. The company will decide when 
to purchase it and when to replace it. Often it is cheaper in the long run to buy computer equipment 
outright, but only if the organization buys the appropriate computer equipment. Buying computers 
often has tax advantages in the United States because of the depreciation rules.
Disadvantages of Buying Computer Hardware. Purchasing computers presents a problem because 
the initial cost of buying the equipment is often very high. Phasing in computer equipment over 
time doesn’t always work due to compatibility problems that exist with different models and 
legacy devices but buying everything at once means tying up capital or borrowing money. The risk 
of equipment obsolescence is a serious concern and getting stuck with equipment that is not useful 
because someone made the wrong decision is a very large risk. Finally, the organization needs to 
remember that the full responsibility for the operation and maintenance stays with the company 
that buys the equipment. This can be a big disadvantage because it ties up people and money.


===== BOOK PAGE 65 =====

CHAPTER 3  •  PR ojECT  MAnA gEMEnT     65
FIGURE 3.6
Comparing the advantages and 
disadvantages of buying computer 
resources versus using cloud 
services.
Advantages Disadvantages
• Full control over hardware
 and software
• Often cheaper in long run
• Provides tax advantages through
 depreciation
• Initial cost is high
• Risk of obsolescence
• Risk of being stuck if choice
 was wrong
• Full responsibility for operation
 and maintenance
Buying
computer
hardware
Using cloud
services
• Maintenance and upgrades
 performed by provider
• Ability to change software and
 hardware rapidly
• Scalable—can grow quickly
• Consistent over multiple platforms
• No capital is tied up
• Company doesn’t control its
 own data
• Data security is at risk
• Reliability risks of the Internet
 platform
• Proprietary APIs and software
 may make switching providers
 difﬁcult
Renting Time and Space in the Cloud
Instead of purchasing their own equipment, companies can use cloud services. Some of the 
services available are web hosting, email hosting, application hosting, backup, storage and 
processing of databases, archiving, and ecommerce support. The advantages and disadvantages 
to buying hardware versus using cloud services are shown in Figure 3.6.
Cloud services are scalable, which means if the business grows, the organization can easily 
add computing power without procuring new hardware. Although few organizations save money 
by purchasing cloud services, they prize the agility afforded by being able to add or stop cloud 
services as needed.
Three main categories of cloud computing are Software as a Service (SaaS), Infrastructure 
as a Service (IaaS), and Platform as a Service (PaaS). With SaaS, the cloud vendor sells access 
to applications (discussed later in this chapter, when we discuss software). With IaaS, also called 
Hardware as a Service (HaaS) , an organization outsources its hardware operations needs to 
the service provider. Using the PaaS approach, companies use the internet to rent all manner of 
hardware, operating systems, storage, and even network capacity. Another option is to use a hybrid 
approach in which some of the hardware is maintained in the local organization and some of the 
software is cloud based. This includes public and private cloud services.
Decisions on cloud computing can first be addressed on a strategic level. Cearley (2010) 
states that a business should (1) define a high-level business case that focuses on the high-level 
benefits of cloud computing for the organization; (2) define core requirements (perhaps making 
a quick list to start) that support the migration of IT to the cloud, including dimensions such as 
system performance, security desired in cloud relationships, IT governance, and predicted growth 
of the enterprise; and (3) define core technologies for the enterprise, starting with a list of cloud 
computing technologies that are helpful. As an analyst, you may be asked to facilitate any or all 
of these steps, or your help might be solicited at some point in the process of moving computing 
services to the cloud.
Benefits of Cloud Computing. Some of the benefits of cloud computing include less time spent 
maintaining legacy systems or even performing routine tasks such as maintenance or upgrading 
of present systems. Using the cloud may make it simpler to acquire IT services and may also 
make it easier and quicker to separate from or discontinue services that are no longer necessary. 
Using cloud services makes your applications scalable, which means you can grow them easily by 
adding more cloud resources. Cloud computing also has the potential to offer consistency across 
multiple platforms that were previously disjointed or difficult to integrate. Finally, no capital is 
tied up and no financing is required.
Drawbacks of Cloud Computing. As with any other innovation, there are some disadvantages of 
adopting cloud computing for organizations. Loss of control of data stored in the cloud is perhaps 
the most striking concern when relying on cloud computing; if the cloud services provider ceased


===== BOOK PAGE 66 =====

66    PART I  •  SYSTEMS AnALYSIS FUnDAMEnTALS
to exist, it is unclear what would happen to the organization’s data. Looming almost as large are 
potential security threats to data that is not stored on premises or even on the organization’s own 
computers. Reliability of the internet as a platform forms the third main concern for organizations. 
Recently, the consulting firm Gartner, Inc. described DRaaS, or Diaster Recovery as a Service, 
which they define as a “stand-alone restoration of enterprise applications at another location 
in the event of a diaster that can range in scope from a self-service to fully managed offering” 
(Blair & Hewitt, 2021). They note that organizations are unprepared to handle disaster recovery 
with cloud providers and are overconfident about their abilities to weather data disasters in a cloud 
environment. Furthermore, they note that the proliferation of cloud services results in difficulty 
in choosing cloud services.
Additionally, something that could dampen an organization’s maneuverability when it comes 
to cloud computing is the prospect that the company could get stuck using application program-
ming interfaces (APIs) that are proprietary with the cloud provider. This might make switching 
among cloud computing providers more difficult. Another development in cloud computing of 
which analysts should be aware is that some countries are now mandating that any company that 
does business there must use cloud service providers based in that country. For example, Apple 
is now obeying legislation like this in China.
Evaluation of Vendor Support for Computer Hardware
Several key areas need to be evaluated when weighing the support services vendors offer to busi-
nesses. Most hardware vendors offer testing of hardware on delivery and a 90-day warranty cov-
ering any factory defects, but you must ascertain what else the vendor has to offer. Cloud service 
providers offer 30- or 60-day money-back guarantees. Vendors of comparable quality frequently 
distinguish themselves from others in the range of support services they offer.
A list of key criteria that ought to be checked when evaluating vendor support is provided 
in Figure 3.7. Support services include routine and preventive maintenance of hardware, specified 
response time (within six hours, next working day, and so on) in case of emergency equipment 
breakdowns, loan of equipment in the event that hardware must be permanently replaced or off-
site repair is required, and in-house training or off-site group seminars for users. Cloud providers 
FIGURE 3.7
Guidelines for vendor selection.
Full line of hardware
Quality products
Warranty
Complete software needs
Custom programming
Warranty
Commitment to schedule
In-house training
Technical assistance
Routine maintenance procedures
Speciﬁed response time in emergencies
Equipment loan while repair is being done
Speciﬁcs Vendors Typically Offer
Hardware Support
Software Support
Installation and Training
Web hosting
Email hosting
Data storage
Cloud Services
Ensure 24/7 data recovery
Mitigate risks of ransomware
Migrate data center smoothly
Disaster Recovery as
a Service
Maintenance
Automatic software upgrades
Support services
Security and antivirus protection
Software as a Service
Vendor Services


===== BOOK PAGE 67 =====

CHAPTER 3  •  PR ojECT  MAnA gEMEnT     67
make claims for uptime and promise to get back to you on a question within a certain amount 
of time, such as 24 hours. Peruse the support services documents accompanying the purchase of 
equipment and remember to involve appropriate legal staff before signing contracts for equipment 
or services.
Unfortunately, the process of evaluating computer hardware and cloud providers is not 
as straightforward as simply comparing costs and choosing the least expensive option. Before 
becoming convinced that buying cheaper compatibles is the way to endow your system with add-
on capability, you need to do enough research to feel confident that a hardware vendor or cloud 
provider is a stable corporate entity.
Understanding the Bring Your Own Device Option
Bring your own device (BYOD) or bring your own technology (BYOT) is a trend appearing in a 
variety of organizations in different industries. These organizations range in size and have employ-
ees of differing skills. In general, BYOD or BYOT means that rather than using a smartphone or 
tablet issued by the organization, employees use their own devices to access corporate networks, 
data, and services remotely when working outside the office. The BYOD approach is often pre-
sented as a way to keep the organization’s hardware costs down and improve morale among 
employees who, on average, already bring one or more mobile devices to work for personal tasks.
As a systems analyst, you will work to discover through a combination of interviews, surveys, 
and observation what personal technology is being used by most of the group. For example, if you 
observe that all the executives in the decision-making group already bring in iPads every day, 
you might conclude that designing dashboards for the iPad has some merit. They are devices you 
want to include in your original design rather than as an afterthought. If your observations show 
that most executives prefer face-to-face meetings, but they use their handheld devices (such as 
mobile phones) to check other corporate data and emails during meetings, then you might want 
to consider supporting corporate email on their personal phones.
Benefits and Drawbacks of BYOD. The benefits of BYOD computing include building employee 
morale; a potential for lowering the initial cost of organization IT hardware purchase; facilitat-
ing remote, round-the-clock access to corporate computer networks regardless of location; and 
building on a familiar user interface to access corporate computing services, applications, data-
bases, and storage. Security risks posed by untrained users are probably the biggest drawback. 
Identified threats are loss of the device itself, theft of the device and its data, unauthorized access 
to corporate networks using personal mobile devices, and so on. Other threats are posed by com-
monly occurring behavior with mobile devices that may be fine on the private side but not on the 
corporate side, such as using free Wi-Fi hotspots, using apps such as Dropbox, and others.
Creating Custom Software
Analysts and organizations are increasingly faced with a make, buy, or outsource decision when 
assessing software for IS projects, particularly when contemplating upgrades to existing or legacy 
systems. Analysts have three choices: creating their own software, purchasing commercial-off-
the-shelf (COTS) software, or using software from a SaaS provider. Figure 3.8 summarizes the 
advantages and disadvantages of each of these options.
Several situations call for the creation of original, custom software or software components. 
The most likely instance is when COTS software does not exist or cannot be identified for the 
desired application. Alternatively, the software may exist but be unaffordable or not easily pur -
chased or licensed.
Original software should be created when an organization is attempting to gain a competitive 
advantage through the leveraged use of IS. This is often the case when an organization is creating 
ecommerce or other innovative applications where none have existed. An organization also may 
be a “first mover” in the use of a particular technology or in its particular industry. Organizations 
that have highly specialized requirements or exist in niche industries also may benefit from creat-
ing original software.
The advantages of creating custom software include being able to respond to specialized 
user and business needs, gaining a competitive advantage by creating innovative software, 
having in-house staff available to maintain the software, and the pride of owning something you 
have created.


===== BOOK PAGE 68 =====

68    PART I  •  SYSTEMS AnALYSIS FUnDAMEnTALS
FIGURE 3.8
Comparing the advantages and 
disadvantages of creating custom 
software, purchasing COTS 
packages, and outsourcing to a 
SaaS provider.
Advantages Disadvantages
• Speciﬁc response to
 specialized business needs
• Innovation may give ﬁrm a
 competitive advantage
• In-house staff available to
 maintain software
• Pride of ownership
• May be signiﬁcantly higher
 initial cost compared to COTS
 software or ASP
• Necessity of hiring or working
 with a development team
• Ongoing maintenance
Creating Custom
Software
• Organizations that do not
 specialize in information
 systems can focus on what
 they do best (their strategic
 mission)
• There is no need to hire,
 train, or retain a large IT staff
• There is no expenditure of
 employee time on
 nonessential IT tasks
• Loss of control of data, systems,
 IT employees, and schedules
• Concern over the ﬁnancial
 viability and long-run stability
 of the SaaS provider
• Security, conﬁdentiality, and
 privacy concerns
• Loss of potential strategic
 corporate advantage regarding
 innovativeness of applications
Using SaaS
• Reﬁned in the commercial
 world
• Increased reliability
• Increased functionality
• Often lower initial cost
• Already in use by other
 ﬁrms
• Help and training comes
 with software
• Programming focused; not
 business focused
• Must live with the existing
 features
• Limited customization
• Uncertain ﬁnancial future
 of vendor
• Less ownership and
 commitment
Purchasing COTS
Packages
The drawbacks of developing custom software include the potential for a significantly higher 
initial cost compared to purchasing COTS software or contracting with a SaaS provider, the neces-
sity of hiring or working with a development team, and the fact that you are responsible for the 
ongoing maintenance because you created the software.
Purchasing COTS Software
COTS software includes such products as the Microsoft Office suite, which includes Word for 
word processing, Excel for spreadsheets, Access for building databases, and other applications. 
Other types of COTS software are for organization-level systems rather than office or personal 
use. A website such as softwareadvice.com lists popular (but costly) enterprise resource planning 
packages such as Oracle and SAP in their reviews of COTS software. These packages differ radi-
cally in the amount of customization, support, and maintenance required compared to Microsoft 
Office. COTS software also can refer to software components or objects (also called building 
blocks) that can be purchased to provide a particular needed functionality in a system.
You should consider using COTS software when you can easily integrate the applications or 
packages into existing or planned systems and when you have identified no need to immediately 
or continuously change or customize systems for users. Your forecasts should demonstrate that 
the organization you are designing the system for is unlikely to undergo major changes after the 
proposed purchase of COTS software, such as a dramatic increase in customers or large physical 
expansions.
There are some advantages to purchasing COTS software that you should keep in mind as 
you weigh alternatives. One advantage is that these products have been refined through the pro-
cess of commercial use and distribution and additional functionalities are often offered. Another 
advantage is that packaged software is typically extensively tested and thus extremely reliable.
Increased functionality is frequently offered with COTS software because a commercial 
product is likely to have companion products, add-on features, and upgrades that enhance its


===== BOOK PAGE 69 =====

CHAPTER 3  •  PR ojECT  MAnA gEMEnT     69
attractiveness. Also, analysts often find that the initial cost of COTS software is lower than the 
cost for either in-house software development or the use of a SaaS provider.
Another advantage of purchasing COTS packages is that many other companies use them, so 
analysts are not experimenting on their clients with one-of-a-kind software applications. Finally, 
COTS software boasts an advantage in the help and training that accompanies the purchase of 
the packaged software.
One example of the use of COTS software is from a theatre company in the nonprofit sector, 
in which organizations (particularly in the performing arts) tend to lag behind their for-profit 
counterparts in adoption of information communication technologies. The theatre company was 
predictably slow to move to the web. When the company wanted to create ecommerce applica-
tions, it was put in a position of having to hire outside designers to create ecommerce applications 
for them. Considering the expense and lack of in-house expertise, many nonprofit organizations 
simply did not move the business portion of their organizations to the web; instead, they waited for 
COTS packages, such as PC-based box office software, or SaaS, such as online ticketing agencies 
with automation already in place, to make these services available to patrons. In-house, custom 
software development is out of the question for most of these groups, which typically have small 
or nonexistent IT staffs and budgets and minimal internal IT expertise.
There is a downside to the use of COTS software. Because it is not meant to be fully custom-
izable, the theatre company lost its ability to change the software to include key features in its 
donor database on which users relied. COTS software also may include errors that could expose 
an organization to liability issues.
There are other disadvantages to consider with the purchase of COTS software, including 
the fact that packages are programmed rather than being focused on human users working in a 
business. Users must live with whatever features exist in the software, whether they are appropri-
ate or not. A disadvantage that grows out of this is the limited customizability of most packaged 
software. Other disadvantages to purchasing COTS software include the necessity of investigating 
the financial stability of the software vendor and the diminished sense of ownership and commit-
ment that is inevitable when the software is considered a product rather than a process.
To achieve some perspective on systems being developed, you should recognize that over 
half of all projects are built from the ground up. According to goremotely.net about 71 percent 
of companies use some type of agile approach for some projects and the others use traditional 
methods like SDLC for some projects. Most of these are developed using an internal systems 
analysis team adopting cloud technology. Computer programmers may be in-house or outsourced.
Fewer than half of all projects are developed from existing applications or components. The 
great majority are modified, some extensively. Less than 5 percent of software is off-the-shelf 
software that requires no modifications at all.
Using the Services of a SaaS Provider
Organizations may realize some benefits from taking an entirely different approach to procuring 
software: outsourcing some of the organization’s software needs to a SaaS provider that special-
izes in IT applications.
There are specific benefits to outsourcing applications to a SaaS provider. For example, organi-
zations that want to retain their strategic focus and do what they’re best at may want to outsource the 
production of IS applications. In addition, outsourcing software needs means that the organization 
doing the outsourcing may be able to sidestep the need to hire, train, and retain a large IT staff. This 
can result in significant savings. When an organization uses SaaS, there is little or no expenditure 
of valuable employee time on nonessential IT tasks; these are handled professionally by SaaS.
Hiring a SaaS provider should not be considered a magic formula for addressing software 
requirements. Some drawbacks to the use of SaaS must be seriously considered. One disadvantage 
is a general loss of control over corporate data, IS, IT employees, and even processing and project 
schedules. Some companies believe that the heart of their business is their information, so even the 
thought of relinquishing control over it is distressing. Another disadvantage is concern over the 
financial viability of any SaaS that is chosen. There might also be concerns about the security of 
the organization’s data and records, along with concern about confidentiality of data and client 
privacy. Finally, when choosing a SaaS provider, there is a potential loss of strategic corporate 
advantage that might have been gained through the company’s deployment of its own innovative 
applications created by its employees.


===== BOOK PAGE 70 =====

70    PART I  •  SYSTEMS AnALYSIS FUnDAMEnTALS
Evaluation of Vendor Support for Software and SaaS
Whether you purchase a COTS package or contract for SaaS from a provider, you will be working 
with vendors who may have their own best interests at heart. You must be willing to evaluate 
software with users and not be unduly influenced by vendors’ sales pitches. Specifically, there are 
six main categories on which to grade software, as shown in Figure 3.9: performance effectiveness, 
performance efficiency, ease of use, flexibility, quality of documentation, and manufacturer support.
Evaluate packaged software based on a demonstration using test data from your client’s 
business and examine accompanying documentation. Vendors’ descriptions alone will not suffice. 
Vendors typically certify that software is working, but they do not guarantee that it will be error-
free in every instance, that it will not crash when users take incorrect actions, or that it will be 
compatible with all other software the organization is currently running. Obviously, they will not 
guarantee their packaged software if it is used in conjunction with faulty hardware.
IDENTIFYING, FORECASTING, AND COMPARING  
COSTS AND BENEFITS
Costs and benefits of a proposed computer system must always be considered together because 
they are interrelated and often interdependent. Although a systems analyst tries to propose 
a system that fulfills various information requirements, decisions to continue with the proposed 
system will be based on a cost–benefit analysis, not on information requirements. In many ways, 
benefits are measured by costs, which becomes apparent in the next section.
Forecasting
Systems analysts are required to predict certain key variables before submitting a proposal to the 
client. To some degree, a systems analyst will rely on a what-if analysis such as, “What if labor 
costs rise only 5 percent per year for the next three years, rather than 10 percent?” The systems 
analyst should realize, however, that they cannot rely on what-if analysis for everything if the 
proposal is to be credible, meaningful, and valuable.
calendar widget to track ad campaign rollouts. And I like the way 
the menus for the screen displays could all be chosen by Roman 
numerals. It was easy to follow. And the vendor isn’t going to be 
hard to move on price. I think they’re already in a price war.”
“Do you want to know my favorite, though?” Roman asks 
archly. “It’s the one put out by Jupiter, Unlimited. I mean, it has 
everything, doesn’t it? It costs a little extra coin, but it does what 
we need it to do, and the documentation is heavenly. They don’t do 
any training, of course. They think they’re above it.”
To answer Roman’s burning questions by your March 15 dead-
line, you need to systematically evaluate the software as well as the 
vendors, and then render a decision. Evaluate each vendor and pack-
age based on what Roman has said so far. (Assume that you can trust 
his opinions.) What are Roman’s apparent biases when evaluating 
software and vendors? What further information do you need about 
each company and its software before you can make a selection? 
Set up a table to evaluate each vendor. Answer each question in a 
separate paragraph.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 3.2 
Veni, Vidi, Vendi, or “I Came, I Saw, I Sold”
“It’s really some choice. I mean, no single package seems to 
have everything we want. Some of them come darn close, though,” 
says Roman, an advertising executive for Empire Magazine with 
whom you have been working on a systems project. Recently, 
the two of you have decided that packaged software would 
probably suit the advertising department’s needs and stem its 
general decline.
“The last salesperson’s demo we saw—you know, the one who 
worked for Data Coliseum—really had a well-rounded pitch. And 
I like their brochure. Full-color printing, on card stock. Classic,” 
Roman asserts. “And what about those people from Vesta Systems? 
They’re really fired up. And their package was easy to use with 
a minimum of ceremony. Besides, they said they would train all 
12 of us, on-site, at no charge. But look at their advertising. They 
just take things off their printers.”
Roman fiddles in his chair as he continues his ad hoc review 
of software and software vendors. “That one package from Mars, 
Inc. really sold me all on its own, though. I mean, it had a built-in


===== BOOK PAGE 71 =====

CHAPTER 3  •  PR ojECT  MAnA gEMEnT     71
FIGURE 3.9
Guidelines for evaluating software.
 Able to perform all required tasks
 Able to perform all tasks desired 
 Well-designed display screens
 Adequate capacity 
Fast response time
Efﬁcient input
Efﬁcient output
Efﬁcient storage of data
Efﬁcient backup 
Satisfactory user interface
Help menus available
“Read Me” ﬁles for last-minute changes
Flexible interface
Adequate feedback
Good error recovery 
Options for input
Options for output
Usable with other software
Good organization
Adequate online tutorial
Website with FAQ
Technical support hotline
Newsletter/email
Website with downloadable product updates 
Software Requirements Speciﬁc Software Features
Performance Efﬁciency
Performance Effectiveness
Ease of Use
Flexibility
Quality of Documentation
Manufacturer Support
A systems analyst has many forecasting models available. The main condition for choosing 
a model is the availability of historical data. If historical data are unavailable, the analyst must 
turn to one of the judgment methods: estimates from the sales force, surveys to estimate customer 
demand, Delphi studies (a consensus forecast developed independently by a group of experts 
through a series of iterations), creation of scenarios, or historical analogies.
If historical data are available, the next differentiation between classes of techniques involves 
whether the forecast is conditional or unconditional. Conditional implies that there is an asso-
ciation among variables in the model or that such a causal relationship exists. Common meth-
ods in this group include correlation, regression, leading indicators, econometrics, and input/
output models.
Unconditional forecasting means the analyst isn’t required to find or identify any causal rela-
tionships. Consequently, systems analysts find that these methods are low-cost, easy-to-implement 
alternatives. Included in this group are graphical judgment, moving averages, and analysis of time-
series data. Because these methods are simple, reliable, and cost-effective, the remainder of the 
section focuses on them.
Estimation of Trends. Trends can be estimated in a number of different ways. One way to esti-
mate trends is to use a moving average. This method is useful because some seasonal, cyclical, 
or random patterns may be smoothed, leaving the trend pattern. The principle behind moving 
averages is to calculate the arithmetic mean of data from a fixed number of periods; a three-month 
moving average is simply the average of the past three months. For example, the average sales for 
January, February, and March are used to predict the sales for April. Then the average sales for 
February, March, and April are used to predict the sales for May, and so on.
When the results are graphed, it is easily noticeable that the widely fluctuating data are 
smoothed. The moving average method is useful for its smoothing ability, but it also has many 
disadvantages. Moving averages are more strongly affected by extreme values than by using 
graphical judgment or estimating by using other methods, such as least squares. An analyst should 
learn forecasting well, as it often provides information that is valuable in justifying an entire project.


===== BOOK PAGE 72 =====

72    PART I  •  SYSTEMS AnALYSIS FUnDAMEnTALS
Identifying Benefits and Costs
Benefits and costs can be either tangible or intangible. Both tangible and intangible benefits and 
costs must be taken into account when systems are considered.
Tangible Benefits. Tangible benefits are advantages that are measurable in dollars that accrue 
to the organization through the use of the information system. Examples of tangible benefits are 
an increase in the speed of processing, access to otherwise inaccessible information, access to 
information on a timelier basis than was possible before, the advantage of the computer’s superior 
calculating power, and a decrease in the amount of employee time needed to complete specific 
tasks. And there are other tangible benefits. Although measurement is not always easy, tangible 
benefits can be measured in terms of actual dollars, resources, or time saved.
“That’s interesting,” says Glinda, “but I’ve been doing my own 
research. Some of our competitors have told me they let a company 
do all the work for them. The company is called Lawn Wizards. 
They do landscaping, but they also maintain accounts receivable 
and scheduling packages.”
So off they went to see the Wizards.
Joel Green, the owner and creator of Lawn Wizards, is proud 
of his software. “I spent a great deal of time working with my 
suppliers, that is, nurseries, in the area, and we have developed 
a coding system for everything,” he brags. “All the trees, sizes 
of trees, shrubs, flowers, mulch, and even lawn care tools have 
numbers.
“I started with a small firm, but when customers realized I paid 
attention to every little detail, my business blossomed.” He adds, 
“My suppliers love my system because it cuts down on confusion.
“I noticed that my competitors were working with the same 
suppliers but were getting less preferential treatment because 
they couldn’t communicate about products very effectively. So, 
I decided I would offer my software for hire. I would make money 
by renting out my software and demand even greater respect from 
my suppliers. I can even deliver it through the cloud. My end-user 
license agreement states that I own the software, product codes, and 
data generated by the system.
“Using my unique Wizards software, I can customize the pack-
age a bit for the customer, but essentially all the lawn services in the 
state will be using my database, codes, and B2B features. I maintain 
my software. If you could see the software code, it would look just 
like a manicured lawn.”
Now Glinda and Elphaba are even more confused than before. 
They have four distinct options: create a custom package on 
their own, buy a standalone commercial software product such 
as QuickBooks Pro, subscribe to an online plan such as Quick-
Books Online, or outsource their needs to Lawn Wizards. Help 
them learn the true secret of (software) happiness by helping 
them articulate the pros and cons of each of their alternatives. 
What would you recommend? In two paragraphs, write a recom-
mendation that grows out of your consideration of their specific 
business situation.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 3.3 
We’re Off to See the Wizards
E lphaba I. Menzel and Glinda K. Chenoweth are the owners of 
Emerald City Beautyscapes, a commercial landscaping company. 
They are trying to decide whether to write their own software, 
perhaps using Microsoft Access as a basis; adopt a COTS software 
package such as QuickBooks Pro; or hire a service called Lawn 
Wizards, Inc. to perform all their bookkeeping functions.
Elphaba turns to Glinda and asks, “Is it possible for us to create 
a system of our own?”
Glinda replies, “I suppose we could, but it would take for -
ever. We would need to define all our fields, our queries, and our 
reports. We would need to know who hasn’t paid us yet and how 
long it has been since we last billed them.”
“Yes,” says Elphaba, “and we would also have to create product 
descriptions, service descriptions, and codes for everything we sell 
and provide.”
“If that were all we needed, we could probably do it,” says 
Glinda. “But we also need to include a scheduling system. We need 
to know when we can provide the services to our customers and 
what to do if we fall behind schedule. Maybe it just isn’t worth it.
“Still,” reflects Glinda, “my mother used to say ‘There’s no 
place like home.’ Maybe there’s no software like homegrown.”
“You see both sides of everything,” remarks Elphaba. “But the 
path you want to take is too long and risky. We need a software 
package that is ready for us to use now. I hear that there are products 
they call commercial off-the-shelf software that we can buy and 
adapt to our lawn service business. I’ll investigate.” So Elphaba sets 
out to look for software that may be suitable.
“I’ve found something,” cries Elphaba. “I found this software 
called QuickBooks Pro at www.quickbooks.intuit.com, and it looks 
like we can afford it. There are numerous versions of the software 
already—one for accounting, one for construction, one for health 
services. Maybe we can find a package that suits us. If not, it looks 
like we can customize the generic version of QuickBooks Pro to fit 
our needs.
“Our system could grow too. QuickBooks Pro is readily scal-
able. We can add customers, suppliers, or products easily. I just 
wanted to plant the idea of buying a ready-made package on you. 
Another possibility is to subscribe to a QuickBooks Online plan.”


===== BOOK PAGE 73 =====

CHAPTER 3  •  PR ojECT  MAnA gEMEnT     73
Intangible Benefits. Some benefits that accrue to an organization from the use of an infor -
mation system are difficult to measure but are important nonetheless. They are known as 
intangible benefits.
Intangible benefits include improving the decision-making process, enhancing accuracy, 
becoming more competitive in customer service, maintaining a good business image, and 
increasing job satisfaction for employees by eliminating tedious tasks. As you can see from this 
list, intangible benefits are extremely important and can have far-reaching implications for a 
business as it relates to people both outside and within the organization.
Although intangible benefits of an information system are important factors that must be 
considered when deciding whether to proceed with a system, a system built solely for its intan-
gible benefits will not be successful. You must discuss both tangible and intangible benefits in 
your proposal because presenting both will enable decision makers in the business to make a 
well-informed decision about the proposed system.
Tangible Costs. The concepts of tangible and intangible costs present a conceptual parallel to the 
tangible and intangible benefits discussed already. Tangible costs are those that systems analysts 
and the business’s accounting personnel can accurately project.
Included in tangible costs are the cost of equipment such as computers and printers, the cost 
of resources, the cost of systems analysts’ time, and the cost of computer programmers’ time and 
other employees’ salaries. These costs are usually well established or can be discovered quite 
easily; they are costs that will require the business to make a cash outlay.
Intangible Costs. Intangible costs are difficult to estimate and may not be known. They include 
losing a competitive edge, losing the reputation for being first with an innovation or the leader 
in a field, declining company image due to increased customer dissatisfaction, and ineffective 
decision making due to untimely or inaccessible information. As you can imagine, it is nearly 
impossible to accurately project a dollar amount for intangible costs. To aid decision makers who 
want to weigh a proposed system and all its implications, you must include intangible costs even 
though they are not quantifiable.
Comparing Costs and Benefits
There are many well-known techniques for comparing the costs and benefits of a proposed system. 
Two are break-even analysis and payback.
Break-Even Analysis. By comparing costs alone, a systems analyst can use break-even analysis 
to determine the break-even capacity of a proposed information system. The point at which the 
total costs of the current system and the proposed system intersect represents the break-even 
point, the point where it becomes profitable for the business to get the new information system.
Total costs include the costs that recur during operation of a system plus the developmen-
tal costs that occur only once (one-time costs of installing a new system)—that is, the tangible 
costs that were discussed previously. Figure 3.10 illustrates a break-even analysis on Tamika’s 
Equipment, a small store that maintains inventory using a manual system. As volume rises, the costs 
of the manual system rise at an increasing rate. A new computer system would cost a substantial 
sum up front, but the incremental costs for higher volume would be rather small. The graph shows 
that the computer system would be cost-effective if the business sold about 600 units per week.
Payback is useful when a business is growing, and volume is a key variable in costs. One 
disadvantage of break-even analysis is that benefits are assumed to remain the same, regardless 
of which system is in place. From our study of tangible and intangible benefits, we know that this 
is clearly not the case.
Payback analysis can determine how long it will take for the benefits of the system to pay 
back the costs of developing it. Figure 3.11 illustrates a system with a payback period of three 
and a half years.
MANAGING TIME AND ACTIVITIES
The process of analysis and design can become unwieldy, especially when the system being 
developed is large. To keep the development activities as manageable as possible, systems analysts 
usually use some of the techniques of project management to help get organized.


===== BOOK PAGE 74 =====

74    PART I  •  SYSTEMS AnALYSIS FUnDAMEnTALS
The Work Breakdown Structure
Systems analysts are responsible for completing projects on time and within budget and for 
including the features promised. To accomplish all three of these goals, a project needs to be 
broken down into smaller tasks or activities. These tasks together make up a work breakdown 
structure (WBS).
When defined properly, the tasks that comprise a WBS have special properties:
1. Each task or activity contains one deliverable, or tangible outcome, from the activity.
2. Each task can be assigned to a single individual or a single group.
3. Each task has a responsible person monitoring and controlling performance.
FIGURE 3.10
Break-even analysis for a  
proposed inventory system.
Cost
($)
Break-Even
Point
Current
System
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
70,000
0
0 200 400 600 800 1,000 1,200
Units Sold
Cost of proposed
system
Cost of current
system
Tamika’s Equipment
Proposed
System
FIGURE 3.11
Payback analysis showing a payback period of three and a half years.
Cost
($)
Costs
Beneﬁts
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
70,000
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Year Cost
($)
Cumulative
Costs
($)
Cumulative
Beneﬁts
($)
Beneﬁts
($)
30,000
1,000
2,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
4,000
30,000
31,000
33,000
35,000
38,000
42,000
46,000
0
12,000
12,000
8,000
8,000
10,000
15,000
0
12,000
24,000
32,000
40,000
50,000
65,000
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Year
Cumulative beneﬁts from
proposed system
Cumulative costs of
proposed system
Payback
Period


===== BOOK PAGE 75 =====

CHAPTER 3  •  PR ojECT  MAnA gEMEnT     75
Activities in a WBS do not need to take the same amount of time or involve the same number 
of team members. The activities defined must add up to 100 percent of the work, however.
The main method for developing a WBS is decomposition or starting with large ideas and 
then breaking them down into manageable activities. This subdivision of ideas into smaller ideas 
and eventually into tasks stops when each task has only one deliverable.
There are different types of work breakdown structures. A WBS can be product oriented. In 
other words, building a website can be broken down into many parts, with each set of pages having 
a specific purpose. You could divide a website into its home page, product description pages, a 
frequently asked questions (FAQ) page, a contact page, and an ecommerce page. Each of these 
pages could contain activities that you could use in your WBS.
Another way is to create a process-oriented WBS. An example of this is shown in Figure 3.12. 
This type of WBS is typical in systems analysis and design. In this example, we show the develop-
ment of a website, but rather than show the development of each page, this example emphasizes 
the importance of each phase in the SDLC.
FIGURE 3.12
A sample work breakdown 
structure.
1.0 Project Initiation
1.1 Assemble and welcome project team
1.2 Conduct historical research about the business
1.3 Discuss objectives with client 
2.0 Early Planning Phase
2.1 Investigate feasibility
2.2 Consider a make vs. buy decision
2.3 Develop a work breakdown structure
2.4 Provide time estimates
2.5 Develop a project schedule
2.6 Calculate cost estimates 
2.7 Prepare project proposal to client
2.8 Present proposal to client
3.0 Develop supporting plans
3.1 Develop a quality management plan
3.2 Identify risks and build a risk management plan
3.3 Describe a communications plan 
3.4 Develop a procurement plan
4.0 Analysis 
4.1 Conduct interviews of key personnel
4.2 Administer questionnaires
4.3 Read company reports
4.4 Analyze data ﬂow
5.0 Design
5.1 Build prototype website
5.2 Obtain reactions from client
5.3 Modify prototype website
5.4 Seek ﬁnal recommendations from client
5.5 Complete website
6.0 Launch
6.1 Create training manual
6.2 Document website features and logic
6.3 Present ﬁnal website to client


===== BOOK PAGE 76 =====

76    PART I  •  SYSTEMS AnALYSIS FUnDAMEnTALS
Time Estimation Techniques
The process of analysis and design can become unwieldy, especially when the system being 
developed is large. To keep the development activities as manageable as possible, you can employ 
some of the techniques of project management to help get organized. In this section, we discuss 
keeping a project on schedule by using time management techniques and keeping a project on 
budget by using cost management and control techniques.
One of the difficult tasks is estimating the time it takes to complete each of the tasks. There 
are numerous approaches:
1. Relying on experience
2. Using analogies
3. Using three-point estimation
4. Identifying function points
5. Using time estimation software
Relying on Experience. Experience pays off when it comes to estimating how long an activity 
will take. If you have previous experience developing software, you will not only know how much 
time some tasks will likely take, but you will also know how much time it will take if something 
goes wrong. Your experience gives you a most likely estimate as well as a pessimistic estimate.
Using Analogies. If you don’t have experience developing a particular piece of software but 
have worked on other types of projects of any kind, you still may be able to arrive at meaningful 
estimates. This approach involves identifying a project that is in some ways similar to the one 
you are about to begin and then describing the analogy. This means you will need to build two 
models, including two PERT or network diagrams, and compare their similarities. Then you can 
have confidence when you provide time estimates for the new project.
Using Three-Point Estimation. Three-point estimation has been used for many years and is still 
a valid technique for time estimating. You start by developing three time estimates for complet-
ing each task and then apply a simple formula to calculate a weighted average. The formula is:
()=+ ∗ +Ea mb4/ 6
where a is the best-case time estimate, b is the pessimistic or worst-case time estimate, and m is 
the most likely time estimate.
Typically, the best-case scenario would improve on the time elapsed a little, but the pessimis-
tic or worst-case estimate would imply that something disastrous happens, such as a weather or 
personnel delay. For example, writing a software module may take 10 days in most cases, but if 
the project is easier than expected, it might take only 8 days. If, however, the coder accepts a job 
elsewhere, it may take 30 days. If you apply the formula, you get this estimate:
()=+ ∗ +
=
E 84 10 30 /6
13 days
In this case, you will estimate that it will take 13 days to finish the task.
Using Function Point Analysis. Another way of estimating the amount of work that needs to be 
done and how large a staff you need to complete a project is called function point analysis. This 
method takes the five main components of a computer system—(1) external inputs, (2) external 
outputs, (3) external queries, (4) internal logical files, and (5) external interface files—and rates 
them in terms of complexity.
You can use function point analysis to estimate the time it takes to develop a system in differ-
ent computer languages and compare them to one another. For more information about function 
point analysis, visit the International Function Point Users Group’s website at www.ifpug.org.
Using Time Estimation Software. Estimating models, such as the Constructive Cost Model 
(COCOMO II), Constructive Systems Engineering Cost Model (COSYSMO), or software based 
on one or both of these models, such as SystemStar, work as follows. A systems analyst enters an 
estimate of the size of the system. This can be entered in a number of different ways, including 
the lines of source code of the current system.


===== BOOK PAGE 77 =====

CHAPTER 3  •  PR ojECT  MAnA gEMEnT     77
A week later, Kim enters Bryce’s office with several pages 
of interview notes in hand. “I’ve talked with most of the people 
who have extensive contact with the system. They’re happy, 
Bryce. And they’re not just talking nonsense. They know what 
they’re doing.”
“I’m sure the managers would like to have a newer system  
than the guys at Quality Foods,” Bryce replies. “Did you talk to 
them?”
Kim says, “Yes. They’re satisfied.”
“And how about the people in systems? Did they say the tech-
nology to update our system is out there?” Bryce inquires insistently.
“Yes. It can be done. That doesn’t mean it should be,” Kim 
says firmly.
As the systems analyst for AllFine Foods, how would you 
assess the feasibility of the systems project Bryce is proposing? 
Based on what Kim has said about the managers, users, and systems 
people, what seems to be the operational feasibility of the proposed 
project? What about the economic feasibility? What about the tech-
nological feasibility? Based on what Kim and Bryce have discussed, 
would you recommend that a full-blown systems study be done? 
Answer yes or no, and then discuss your recommendation and the 
reasoning behind it in a paragraph.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 3.4 
Food for Thought
“We could really make some changes. Shake up some people. 
Let them know we’re with it. Technologically, I mean,” said Bryce 
Bowen, vice president for AllFine Foods, a wholesale dairy prod-
ucts distributor. “That old system should be overhauled. I think we 
should just tell the staff that it’s time to change.”
“Yes, but what would we actually be improving?” Kim Han, 
assistant to the vice president, asks. “I mean, there aren’t any 
substantial problems with the system input or output that I can see.”
Bryce complains, “Kim, you’re purposely not seeing my point. 
People out there see us as a stodgy firm. A new computer system 
could help change that. Change the look of our invoices. Send 
jazzier reports to the food store owners. Get some people excited 
about us as leaders in wholesale food distributing and computers.”
“Well, from what I’ve seen over the years,” Kim replies, “a new 
system is very disruptive, even when the business really needs 
it. People dislike change, and if the system is performing the way it 
should, maybe there are other things we could do to update our 
image that wouldn’t drive everyone nuts in the process. Besides, 
you’re talking big bucks for a new gimmick.”
Bryce says, “I don’t think just tossing it around here between 
the two of us is going to solve anything. Check on it and get back to 
me. Wouldn’t it be wonderful?”
Also considered are other variables, such as the experience or capability of the team, the type 
of platform or operating system, the level of usability of the finished software (for example, what 
languages are necessary), and other factors that can drive up costs. Once the data are entered, you 
can make calculations and get a rough projection of the completion date. As the project gets under 
way, more specific estimates are possible.
PROJECT SCHEDULING
Planning includes all the activities required to select a systems analysis team, assign members 
of the team to appropriate projects, estimate the time required to complete each task, and schedule 
the project so that tasks are completed in a timely fashion. Control means using feedback to moni-
tor the project, including comparing the plan for the project with its actual evolution. In addition, 
control means taking appropriate action to expedite or reschedule activities to finish on time while 
motivating team members to complete the job properly.
This section contains an example in which a systems analyst, acting as a project manager, 
begins with the basic activities of analysis, design, and implementation. Then the analyst uses 
decomposition to break apart the main activities into smaller subtasks, as shown in Figure 3.13. 
Then the analysis phase is further broken down into data gathering, data flow and decision 
analysis, and proposal preparation. Design is broken down into data entry design, input and 
output design, and data organization. The implementation phase is divided into implementation 
and evaluation.
In subsequent steps, a systems analyst needs to consider each of these tasks and break them 
down further so that planning and scheduling can take place. Figure 3.14 shows how the analysis 
phase is described in more detail. For example, data gathering is broken down into five activities, 
from conducting interviews to observing reactions to the prototype. This particular project requires


===== BOOK PAGE 78 =====

78    PART I  •  SYSTEMS AnALYSIS FUnDAMEnTALS
data flow analysis but not decision analysis, so the systems analyst has written in “analyze data 
flow” as the single step in the middle phase. Finally, proposal preparation is broken down into 
three steps: perform cost–benefit analysis, prepare proposal, and present proposal.
The systems analyst, of course, has the option to break down steps further. For instance, the 
analyst could specify each of the people to be interviewed. The amount of detail necessary depends 
on the project, but all critical steps need to appear in the plans.
Sometimes the most difficult part of project planning is the crucial step of estimating the time 
it takes to complete each task or activity. When quizzed about reasons for lateness on a particular 
project, project team members cited poor scheduling estimates that hampered the success of proj-
ects from the outset. There is no substitute for experience in estimating time requirements, and 
systems analysts who have had the opportunity of an apprenticeship or internship are fortunate 
in this regard.
Planners have attempted to reduce the inherent uncertainty in determining time estimates by 
projecting most likely, pessimistic, and optimistic estimates and then using a weighted average 
formula to determine the expected time an activity will take. This approach offers little more in 
the way of confidence, however. Perhaps the best strategy for a systems analyst is to adhere to 
a structured approach in identifying activities and describing these activities in sufficient detail. 
In this manner, the systems analyst will at least be able to limit unpleasant surprises.
Using Gantt Charts for Project Scheduling
A Gantt chart  is a tool that enables you to easily schedule tasks. It is a chart on which bars 
represent tasks or activities. The length of each bar represents the relative length of the task.
FIGURE 3.13
Beginning to plan a project by 
breaking it into three major 
activities.
Phase Activity
Analysis Data gathering
Data ﬂow and decision analysis
Proposal preparation
Design Data entry design
Input design
Output design
Data organization
Implementation Implementation
Evaluation
Break apart
the major
activities into
smaller ones.
FIGURE 3.14
Refining the planning and 
scheduling of analysis activities 
by adding detailed tasks and 
establishing the time required to 
complete the tasks.
8
Conduct interviews
Administer questionnaires
Read company reports
Introduce prototype
Observe reactions to prototype
Analyze data ﬂow
Perform cost-beneﬁt analysis
Prepare proposal
Present proposal
Data gathering
Data ﬂow and decision analysis
Proposal preparation
3
4
4
5
3
3
2
2
Weeks
RequiredDetailed ActivityActivity
Break these
down further , then estimate
time required.


===== BOOK PAGE 79 =====

CHAPTER 3  •  PR ojECT  MAnA gEMEnT     79
FIGURE 3.15
Using a two-dimensional Gantt 
chart for planning activities that 
can be accomplished in parallel.
Activity
I n co m p l e t e activity
C o m p l e t e d activity
P a r t i a l l y completed activity
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3
Conduct interviews
Administer questionnaires
Read company reports
Analyze data ﬂows
Introduce prototype
Observe reactions
Perform cost-beneﬁt
Prepare proposal
Present proposal
Weeks
Current Week
Figure 3.15 is an example of a two-dimensional Gantt chart in which time is indicated on 
the horizontal dimension, and a description of activities makes up the vertical dimension. In this 
example, the Gantt chart shows the analysis or information-gathering phase of the project. Notice 
on the chart that conducting interviews will take three weeks, administering the questionnaire will 
take four weeks, and so on. These activities overlap part of the time. In the chart the special symbol 
▲ signifies that right now, it is week 9. The bars with color shading represent projects or parts 
of projects that have been completed, telling us that the systems analyst is behind in introducing 
prototypes but ahead in analyzing data flows. Action must be taken on introducing prototypes 
soon so that other activities or even the project itself will not be delayed as a result.
The main advantage of a Gantt chart is its simplicity. Not only is this technique easy to use, 
but it also lends itself to worthwhile communication with end users. Another advantage of using a 
Gantt chart is that the bars representing activities or tasks are drawn to scale; that is, the size of the 
bars indicates the relative length of time it will take to complete each task. You can use Microsoft 
Project to develop a Gantt chart.
Using PERT Diagrams
PERT is an acronym for Program Evaluation and Review Technique. A program (a synonym 
for a project) is represented by a network of nodes and arrows that are evaluated to determine 
the critical activities; improve the schedule, if necessary; and review progress once the project 
is undertaken. PERT was developed in the late 1950s for use in the U.S. Navy’s Polaris nuclear 
submarine project. It reportedly saved the U.S. Navy two years of development time. PERT charts 
are called network diagrams in Microsoft Project.
PERT is useful when activities can be done in parallel rather than in sequence. A systems 
analyst can benefit from using PERT by applying it to systems projects on a smaller scale, espe-
cially when some team members can be working on certain activities at the same time that other 
team members are working on other tasks.
Figure 3.16 compares a simple Gantt chart with a PERT diagram. Arrows in the PERT 
diagram represent the activities expressed as bars in the Gantt chart. The length of the arrows has 
no direct relationship with the activity durations. Circles on the PERT diagram are called events 
and can be identified by numbers, letters, or any other arbitrary form of designation. The circular 
nodes are present to (1) recognize that an activity is completed and (2) indicate which activities 
need to be completed before new activities may be undertaken (which is called precedence).
In the PERT example shown here, activity C may not be started until activity A is completed. 
Precedence is not indicated at all in the Gantt chart, so it is not possible to tell whether activity C 
is scheduled to start on day 4 on purpose or by coincidence.
A project has a beginning, a middle, and an end; in this example, the beginning is event 10 
and the end is event 50. To find the length of the project, each path from beginning to end is iden-
tified and the length of each path is calculated. In this example, path 10–20–40–50 has a length


===== BOOK PAGE 80 =====

80    PART I  •  SYSTEMS AnALYSIS FUnDAMEnTALS
of 15 days, whereas path 10–30–40–50 has a length of 11 days. Even though one person may be 
working on path 10–20–40–50 and another on path 10–30–40–50, the project is not a race. The 
project requires that both sets of activities (or paths) be completed; consequently, the project takes 
15 days to complete.
The longest path is referred to as the critical path. Although the critical path is determined 
by calculating the longest path, it is defined as the path that will cause the whole project to fall 
behind if even one day’s delay is encountered on that path. Note that if you are delayed one day 
on path 10–20–40–50, the entire project will take longer, but if you are delayed one day on path 
10–30–40–50, the entire project will not suffer. The leeway to fall behind somewhat on noncritical 
paths is called slack time.
Occasionally, PERT diagrams need pseudo-activities, referred to as dummy activities, to pre-
serve the logic of or to clarify the diagram. (This is an unfortunate descriptor, but it is the industry 
standard.) Figure 3.17 shows two PERT diagrams with dummies. Project 1 and Project 2 are quite 
different, and the way the dummy is drawn makes the difference clear. In Project 1, activity C 
FIGURE 3.16
A Gantt chart compared with a 
PERT diagram (network diagram) 
for scheduling activities.
A
B
C
D
E
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
A, 4 C, 5
B, 2 D, 3
E, 610
20
30
40 50
FIGURE 3.17
Precedence of activities is 
important in determining the 
length of a project when using a 
PERT diagram.
A, 9
B, 2 C, 5
C, 5
A, 9
B, 2
20
10 40
10 40
30
20
30
Dummy
Dummy Project 1
Project 2


===== BOOK PAGE 81 =====

CHAPTER 3  •  PR ojECT  MAnA gEMEnT     81
FIGURE 3.18
Listing activities for use in 
drawing a PERT diagram.
Activity DurationPredecessor
A   
B   
C   
D   
E   
F   
G   
H   
I    
Conduct interviews
Administer questionnaires
Read company reports
Analyze data ﬂow
Introduce prototype
Observe reactions to prototype
Perform cost-beneﬁt analysis
Prepare proposal
Present proposal
None
A
None
B, C
B, C
E
D
F, G
H
3
4
4
8
5
3
3
2
2
can be started only if both A and B are finished because all arrows coming into a node must be 
completed before leaving the node. In Project 2, however, activity C requires only activity B’s 
completion and can therefore be under way while activity A is still taking place.
Project 1 takes 14 days to complete, whereas Project 2 takes only 9 days. The dummy in 
Project 1 is necessary, of course, because it indicates a crucial precedence relationship. The 
dummy in Project 2, on the other hand, is not required, and activity A could have been drawn 
from 10 to 40, eleminating event 20 completely.
Therefore, there are many reasons for using a PERT diagram over a Gantt chart. The PERT 
diagram allows:
1. Easy identification of the order of precedence
2. Easy identification of the critical path and thus critical activities
3. Easy determination of slack time
A PERT Example. Suppose a systems analyst is trying to set up a realistic schedule for the data-
gathering and proposal phases of the systems analysis and design life cycle. The systems analyst 
looks over the situation and lists activities that need to be accomplished along the way. This 
list, which appears in Figure 3.18, also shows that some activities must precede other activities. 
The time estimates were determined as discussed in an earlier section of this chapter.
Drawing The PERT Diagram. In constructing the PERT diagram for this example, the analyst looks 
first at the activities that require no predecessor activities—in this case A (conduct interviews) 
and C (read company reports). In the example in Figure 3.19, the analyst chose to number the 
nodes 10, 20, 30, and so on and drew two arrows out of the beginning node 10. These arrows 
represent activities A and C and are labeled as such. Nodes numbered 20 and 30 are drawn at the 
end of these respective arrows. The next step is to look for any activity that requires only A as 
a predecessor; task B (administer questionnaires) is the only one, so it can be represented by an 
arrow drawn from node 20 to node 30.
Because activities D (analyze data flow) and E (introduce prototype) require both activities 
B and C to be finished before they are started, arrows labeled D and E are drawn from node 30, 
the event that recognizes the completion of both B and C. This process is continued until the 
entire PERT diagram is completed. Notice that the entire project ends at an event called node 80.
FIGURE 3.19
A completed PERT diagram for 
the analysis phase of a systems 
project.
A, 3
C, 4
B, 4
D, 8
E, 5 F, 3
G, 3 H, 2 I , 2
30 50
40
60 70 8010
20


===== BOOK PAGE 82 =====

82    PART I  •  SYSTEMS AnALYSIS FUnDAMEnTALS
Identifying the Critical Path. Once the PERT diagram is drawn, it is possible to identify the 
critical path by calculating the sum of the activity times on each path and choosing the longest 
path. In this example, there are four paths: 10–20–30–50–60–70–80, 10–20–30–40–60–70–80, 
10–30–50–60–70–80, and 10–30–40–60–70–80. The longest path is 10–20–30–50–60–70–80, 
which takes 22 days. It is essential that the systems analyst carefully monitor the activities on the 
critical path to keep the entire project on time or even shorten the project length, if warranted.
CONTROLLING A PROJECT
No matter how well a systems analyst plans a project, things can go wrong. In this section, we 
discuss how to estimate cost and prepare a budget, how to predict and prepare for risk, how to 
make up time using expediting, and how to control costs when the budget needs revising, the team 
falls behind, or there are cost overruns.
Estimating Costs and Preparing the Budget
Keeping a project on time is important, but it is also essential that the cost of a project be managed 
properly. Once a WBS is created and a schedule is planned, the analyst needs to:
1. Estimate costs for each activity in the WBS
2. Prepare a budget for the project and have it approved by the organization or client
3. Manage and control the costs throughout the project
Earlier we discussed cost estimates for equipment and off-the-shelf software, resources we 
need to complete the project. Now we are concerned with other types of resources needed to 
complete each task in the WBS. The main resources for this part of the project are the time of the 
team members and the type of special equipment and tools needed to finish each of the activities.
Many approaches to cost estimation are available to a systems analyst. They are similar to 
the estimates used for time estimates and include the following:
1. Basing estimates on similar projects, also called the top-down approach
2. Building bottom-up estimates
3. Using parametric modeling
The Top-Down Approach to Cost Estimation. Previous experience with estimating costs means a 
great deal, especially if the project you are attempting to estimate resembles a project you have 
previously worked on. If you’ve developed a website with similar features, then you can reliably 
estimate the costs of developing a new website.
Customization is possible. The new website may feature a different number of products for 
sale, but it is possible to adjust the costs accordingly.
The Bottom-Up Approach to Cost Estimation. Often, an analyst is faced with a project that requires 
something unique, such as development in a different programming language. In this case, the 
analyst needs to use a bottom-up approach.
A systems analyst can take the WBS and ask each responsible project team member to esti-
mate the cost involved for completing the activity that is their responsibility. This method, how-
ever, yields estimates that may be good or bad, depending on the abilities of each team member. 
The analyst, acting as a project manager, must review each of these estimates and arrive at a cost 
estimation that satisfies the team and the client. The obvious problem with the bottom-up method 
is the time it takes to make each estimate along the way.
Parametric Modeling. This method involves making estimates for each of the many factors, or 
parameters, that make up a project. For example, you can estimate that it will cost $75 per line 
of code and $80 per hour for the computer programmers needed; you can then estimate the lines of 
code and hours it will take to complete the project. Special parametric modeling software such as 
COCOMO II, mentioned previously, is often useful when modeling the project.
Why Cost Estimates Fail. In practice, most systems analysts use a combination of all three of 
the cost-estimating methods just described. There are two main reasons cost estimates fail. First, 
an analyst is likely to be overly optimistic. An analyst believes in the team members, and an


===== BOOK PAGE 83 =====

CHAPTER 3  •  PR ojECT  MAnA gEMEnT     83
optimistic estimate will show the team completing the project quickly and without errors all the 
time. An analyst is likely to be optimistic and underestimate the lines of code and effort in general.
Second, an analyst may want to move past the cost estimation process and get on with pre-
paring and presenting the budget and beginning the actual work on the project. The analyst may 
therefore spend less time than is needed to properly prepare the estimates. The analyst should be 
as accurate as possible, even though the estimates will be revised as the project continues.
Preparing the Budget. In the end, a systems analyst needs to prepare a budget even if the esti-
mates are not perfect. The budget is a critical deliverable, and every client wants to see a detailed 
budget early in the process.
When working for a client, a systems analyst needs to conform to the standard process the 
client uses to develop a budget. Most of the time, the client will have standard forms it uses for 
this purpose. A sample budget is shown in Figure 3.20.
The budget contains estimates for the hours worked and the rates of pay for each of the 
internal or outsourced workers. It also contains hardware and software costs and spells out how 
much of each type of equipment is needed. It also explains the costs involved with training.
Managing Risk
The early discussions you have with management and others requesting a project, along with the 
feasibility studies you do, are usually the best defenses possible against taking on projects that 
have a high probability of failure. Your training and experience will improve your ability to judge 
Color-coding helps a project manager sort out similar phases, tasks, 
and resources. OmniPlan, available for Macs, takes advantage of 
color-coding to set up a project, identify tasks, identify the critical 
path, and flag impossible situations.
MAC APPEAL
FIGURE 3. MAC
OmniPlan project management software from The Omni Group. (Used by permission of 
the Omni Group.)


===== BOOK PAGE 84 =====

84    PART I  •  SYSTEMS AnALYSIS FUnDAMEnTALS
the worthiness of projects and the motivations that prompt others to request projects. If you are 
part of an in-house systems analysis team, you must keep current with the political climate of the 
organization as well as with financial and competitive situations.
It is important, however, to note that systems projects can and do have serious problems. 
Those that are developed using agile methods are not immune to such troubles. To illustrate what 
can go wrong in a project, a systems analyst may want to draw a fishbone diagram (also called a 
cause-and-effect diagram or an Ishikawa diagram). When you examine Figure 3.21, you will see 
why it is called a fishbone diagram; it resembles the skeleton of a fish.
When using a fishbone diagram, you systematically list all the problems that can possibly 
occur. In the case of the agile approach, it is useful to organize a fishbone diagram by listing all 
the resource control variables on the top and all the activities on the bottom. Some problems, such 
as schedule slips, might be obvious, but others, such as scope creep (the desire to add features 
after the analyst hears new stories) or developing features with little value, are not as obvious.
You can learn from the wisdom gained by people involved in earlier project failures. When 
asked to reflect on why projects had failed, professional programmers cited management setting 
impossible or unrealistic dates for completion, belief in the myth that simply adding more people 
to a project would expedite it (even though the original target date on the project was unrealistic), 
and management behaving unreasonably by forbidding the team to seek professional expertise 
from outside the group to help solve specific problems.
Remember that you are not alone in the decision to begin a project. Although apprised of 
your team’s recommendations, management will have the final say about whether a proposed 
project is worthy of further study (that is, further investment of resources). The decision process 
of your team must be open and stand up to scrutiny from those outside it. The team members 
should consider that their reputation and standing in the organization are inseparable from the 
projects they accept.
Managing Time Using Expediting
Speeding up a process is called expediting, and sometimes you may benefit from completing a 
project much faster, such as receiving a bonus if you finish sooner. A second example is realizing 
that valuable project team resources and team members can be used for some other project if you 
finish the current project before the due date.
Figure 3.22 lists each activity in the project and the original estimated time required to 
complete each of these activities. The third column, labeled “crash time,” refers to the absolute 
minimum time in which an activity can be completed if additional money is funneled to that 
activity. The final column contains the cost of reducing the activity duration by one week.
FIGURE 3.20
Part of a sample budget for a 
software development project, 
showing hardware, software, and 
personnel costs.
1. Project Team
Project manager (systems analyst)
Project team members
Outside contractors (testers)
600
2,400
200
$120
80
20
$72,000
192,000
4,000
4. Training
Total Project Cost Estimate
Seminars for team members
Seminars for trainees
Trainee hourly costs
5
5
1,300
3,500
1,200
20
17,500
6,000
26,000
 $419,000
2. Hardware resources
Workstations
iPads
5
5
4,000
900
20,000
4,500
3. Software
Off-the-shelf software
Software developed in-house
5 400
75,000
2,000
75,000
Hours or
Units
Cost per Hour
or Unit SubtotalsItems


===== BOOK PAGE 85 =====

CHAPTER 3  •  PR ojECT  MAnA gEMEnT     85
FIGURE 3.22
Estimated duration, crash time, 
and the cost of expediting project 
activities.
Activity
Estimated
Duration Cost/WeekCrash Time
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
3
4
4
8
5
3
3
2
2
1
2
2
6
5
3
3
2
1
$ 800
500
400
1,000
1,000
800
800
400
600
Expediting can help reduce the time it takes to complete an entire project, but the expedited 
activities must be on the critical path for expediting to make a time difference. Which activity is 
expedited on the critical path depends on the cost, assuming that the activity is not already at its 
crash time.
The maximum number of weeks each activity can be reduced is the difference between the 
expected time and its crash time. For example, activity B, administering questionnaires, could 
be reduced from four weeks to two weeks at a cost of $500 per week, but it cannot be reduced to 
less than two weeks; activity H, preparing the proposal, cannot be reduced because it is already 
at its crash time.
The expediting analysis for this example is provided in Figure 3.23. The expediting process 
takes place one step at a time, until it is impossible to expedite any further. The columns in the table 
include eligible activities (tasks that are on the critical path and can be reduced by expediting), the 
activity chosen (because it is the cheapest alternative), the time it currently takes to complete each 
of the paths, the cost of expediting the chosen activity, and finally the cumulative cost.
FIGURE 3.21
A fishbone diagram may be used 
to identify all the things that can 
go wrong in developing a system.
Defect rate excessive
Customer not
satisﬁed with interface
Fear of change
Design not
creative enough
High staﬀ turnover
Features with
little value
Need for additional
programmers
Scope creep
Schedule slips
Recoding required by
business changes
Inadequate feedback
from testing
Communication
breakdown
System fails tests
Misunderstanding of
businessToo complex code
Cost ScopeQuality
Designing Testing Coding Listening
Time


===== BOOK PAGE 86 =====

86    PART I  •  SYSTEMS AnALYSIS FUnDAMEnTALS
In the first step, the critical path is 10–20–30–50–60–70–80, so the eligible activities are A, B, 
D, and I. Activities G and H are also on the critical path, but they are already at their crash times 
and are consequently ineligible for expediting. The cheapest alternative is to expedite activity B 
by one day, which reduces the first path from 22 to 21 weeks and the second from 19 to 18 weeks; 
the third and fourth paths are not affected by the reduction because activity B is not on either of 
those paths.
The critical path, and therefore the entire project, is reduced from 22 to 21 weeks (circled on 
the table). We can repeat this reduction and reduce the project time by another week.
When activity B reaches its crash time, another activity must be chosen. Row 3 in the table 
shows that activities A, D, and I are eligible, and activity I is the cheapest alternative. Reducing 
activity I reduces not only the critical path but all paths because it is common to all of them.
In the fourth step, activity A is chosen, reducing paths 1 and 2, but as a result there are now 
two critical paths. This implies that any reduction of the project time will take place only if both 
critical paths are reduced at the same time.
We can shorten both paths in the fifth and sixth steps by choosing either a combination of 
activities A and C (one activity from each of the critical paths) or activity D (an activity common to 
both critical paths). Reducing activity D by two days shortens the paths to 16, 16, 16, and 15 days, 
respectively, and now there are three critical paths.
Finally, when activity D reaches its crash time, the only available choice is a combination of 
activities A and C. The minimum project time is therefore 15 weeks, obtainable by reducing activ-
ity A by two days, activity B by two days, activity C by one day, activity D by two days, and 
activity I by one day, at a total cost of $5,600.
This example describes all-out expediting to obtain the minimum project time at any cost. But 
a systems analyst may be faced with a budget. In our example, a budget of $4,000 would result 
in expediting up to and including step 5. The project would be shortened from 22 to 17 weeks, 
at a cost of $3,400.
Another possible criterion would be the net amount that could be saved if the project  
were shortened. Suppose that in the above example the analyst would save $750 per week, 
mostly consisting of opportunities available for the project team to begin new projects sooner. In  
this case, expediting would not take place until Step 3 because the incremental cost of Step 4  
($800 for expending activity A) would exceed the $750 saved.
Expediting can make or break a successful project. The systems analyst has to remain on top 
of the situation by managing the project throughout the entire development process. The analyst 
needs to make sure project costs are managed properly.
Controlling Costs Using Earned Value Management
Once a systems analyst has an approved budget, it is imperative that the analyst keeps it updated 
so the project doesn’t exceed the budget as it progresses. The baseline needs to be continually 
revised, and all the stakeholders need to be informed.
FIGURE 3.23
Using expediting to minimize 
project time.
Eligible
Activities
Activity
Chosen
Cost Cumulative
Cost
Time for Each Path
A, B, D, or I B $ 500 $ 500
A, B, D, or I B 500 1,000
A, D, or I I 600 1,600
A or D A 800 2,400
A and C, or D D 1,000 3,400
A and C, or D D 1,000 4,400
A and C A and C 1,200 5,600
21
22
20
19
18
17
16
15
18
19
17
17
16
16
16
15
19
19
19
18
18
17
16
15
16
16
15
15
15
15
15
14


===== BOOK PAGE 87 =====

CHAPTER 3  •  PR ojECT  MAnA gEMEnT     87
Changes often occur in the middle of a project. The client may request new features, or new 
technologies may be introduced that will change the way the system is developed. No matter what 
these changes are, the budget needs to be revised.
One tool available to systems analysts is earned value management (EVM). It is a technique 
used to help determine progress (or setbacks) on a project and involves project cost, the project 
schedule, and the performance of the project team. Here are the four key measures in EVM:
• Budget at completion (BAC) is the total budget for the project, from the beginning until 
completion. If you are calculating the performance measures for a task, then it is the total 
budget for the task.
• Planned value (PV) is the value of the work that is to be completed on the project  
(or, alternatively, the work completed on any task). Because the value of the work completed 
is how much effort and money will be put into it, you can think of PV as the budgeted cost 
of work scheduled.
• Actual cost (AC) is the total cost (direct and indirect) incurred in completing the work on the 
project (or, alternatively, a task) up to that particular point in time. Another way of referring 
to this is actual cost of work performed to date.
• Earned value (EV) is an estimate of the value of the work performed thus far. EV refers only 
to the work that has been completed to date. EV is calculated as follows:
= ∗ pEV PV
where p is the percentage of the work completed thus far.
Figure 3.24 shows the cost of developing a website over a five-month period. In this example, 
the development of our website is well under way. The budget at completion is the planned bud-
get of $18,000, the total estimated cost of developing the website at the end of five months. It is 
calculated by summing the cost figures in the estimated cost column.
At the end of the first, second, and third months, the actual cost of the project equals the 
cumulative estimated cost, but in the fourth month, the actual cost is $17,000 versus the $15,000 
from the cumulative estimate column. It is obvious that we are going over our budget.
It appears to be worse. We’ve only completed 50 percent of Stage 4 at the end of the 
fourth month. That means we’re falling behind in our schedule as the costs are rising.
Let’s see what the damage is. We already know that the budget at completion for the project 
is $18,000 and that the actual cost at the end of the fourth month is $17,000. Let’s determine the 
PV and the EV at this time.
The PV is simply the cumulative estimate at the end of month 4, or $15,000. To calculate the 
PV , we need to multiply the earned value by the percentage of the project that is complete. We 
see in the table that the first three stages are complete, but the fourth stage is only half finished. 
To date, this means that:
p 100 100 100 50 / 100 100 100 100
.875
() ()= +++ +++
=
FIGURE 3.24
The anticipated cost of a website development project over a five-month period.
Month 1 Stage 1 $6,000 $6,000 1 month 100% $6,000
Month 2 Stage 2 3,000 9,000 1 month 100% 3,000
Month 3 Stage 3 3,000 12,000 1 month 100% 3,000
Month 4 Stage 4 3,000 15,000 1 month 50% 5,000
Month 5 Stage 5 3,000 18,000 1 month 0% Not yet begun
$6,000
9,000
12,000
17,000
Not yet begun
Estimated
Cost
Cumulative
Estimate
Estimated
Duration
Stage
Completed
Actual Cost of
Stage to Date
Actual Cost of
Project to Date
At the
End of
Stage


===== BOOK PAGE 88 =====

88    PART I  •  SYSTEMS AnALYSIS FUnDAMEnTALS
So the EV is:
= ∗
= ∗
=
pEV PV
$15, 000 .875
$13,125
The four variables—budget at completion, planned value, actual cost, and earned value—are 
the core of earned value management. They can be used to calculate a number of performance 
measures, including cost variance, schedule variance, the cost performance index, and the sched-
ule performance index:
• Cost variance (CV) tells us whether the project or task is costing more than we have planned. 
If CV is negative, our costs are greater than planned. If it is positive, it is costing less than 
planned. CV is simply:
CV EV AC=−
• Schedule variance (SV) tells us whether the project is taking more time than planned. If so, 
it will have a negative impact on our costs. Once again, if SV is negative, then it is taking 
longer than planned to perform the work, and the amount is the cost overage. If SV is posi-
tive, then it is taking less time than planned, and the amount indicates how much we are 
under budget. SV is obtained by subtracting the planned value from the earned value, as 
follows:
SV EV PV=−
• Cost performance index (CPI) is a ratio that signifies whether a project is over budget. If the 
index is less than 1.0, the project or task is over budget. If the ratio is greater than 1.0, the 
project or task is under budget. CPI can be calculated as follows:
=CPIE V/ AC
• Schedule performance index (SPI) is a ratio that tells us whether a project is falling behind 
schedule. If the SPI is less than 1.0, it implies that the project or task is behind schedule. If 
the SPI ratio is greater than 1.0, the project is ahead of schedule. Schedule performance index 
can be calculated as follows:
=SPI EV /P V
In our continuing example of website development, we can now calculate these four 
performance measures:
Cost variance at the end of the fourth month is:
CV EV AC
$13,125 $17, 000
$3,875()
=−
=−
=−
meaning that we are $3,875 over budget.
Schedule variance is:
SV EV PV
$13,125 $15, 000
$1,875()
=−
=−
=−
implying that we are behind schedule and are over budget.
The cost performance index is:
=
=
=
CPIE V/ AC
$13,125 / $17, 000
.772


===== BOOK PAGE 89 =====

CHAPTER 3  •  PR ojECT  MAnA gEMEnT     89
FIGURE 3.25
How the earned value 
management values relate to the 
planned and actual development  
of the website.
EV = $13,125
AC = $17,000 ETC = $6,315
Time
Originally Budgeted
BAC = $18,000
Revised Budget
EAC = $23,315
Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage 4 Stage 5
PV = $15,000
or 77.2 percent. This means the team is performing at a rate far below the expected rate of 
performance. This figure is used later.
The schedule performance index is:
=
=
=
SPI EV /P V
$13,125 / $15, 000
.875
or 87.5 percent. Once again, a ratio lower than 1.0 means that the project is behind schedule.
Finally, a systems analyst may want to calculate two key variables: estimate to complete 
(ETC) and estimate at completion (EAC). They tell the analyst how much it will cost to finish 
the project or task from this point onward.
ETC considers how the team has done in the past and estimates how much additional money 
will be required to complete the project at its current rate of performance. It is calculated by 
subtracting the earned value from the budget at completion. That result is divided by the CPI 
calculated earlier, as follows:
()=−ETC BACE V/ CPI
EAC represents the revised budget. It is the amount the entire project or task will cost when 
it is finished. It is calculated by adding the actual cost to the estimated amount of money it will 
take to complete the project. The equation is:
EACA C ETC=+
In our ongoing example of the website development project, the estimate to complete the 
project is:
()=− =ETC $18, 000 $13,125 / .772 $6, 315
This means that we will need to spend $6,315 more than we have up to this point to finish 
the website. The estimate at completion will be:
EAC $17, 000 $6, 315
$23, 315
=+
=
which is significantly more than the $18,000 we originally budgeted for. Figure 3.25 shows how 
some of these performance measures relate to the original schedule and budget and the revised 
schedule and budget.


===== BOOK PAGE 90 =====

90    PART I  •  SYSTEMS AnALYSIS FUnDAMEnTALS
It is important for a systems analyst to keep an eye on cost and to address the budget -
ary implications when unexpected delays or cost overruns occur. An analyst must constantly 
balance cost, time, and scope (that is, which systems features will be included) when working 
on any project.
MANAGING THE PROJECT TEAM
Along with managing time and resources, systems analysts must also manage people. Manage-
ment is accomplished primarily by communicating accurately to team members who have been 
selected for their competence and compatibility. Goals for project productivity must be set, and 
members of systems analysis teams must be motivated to achieve them.
Assembling a Team
Assembling a team is desirable. If a project manager has an opportunity to create a dream team of 
skilled people to develop a system, who should they choose? In general, project managers need 
to look for others who share their values of teamwork and are guided by the desire to deliver a 
high-quality system on time and on budget. Other desirable team member characteristics include 
a good work ethic, honesty, competence, and readiness to take on leadership based on expertise, 
motivation, enthusiasm for the project, and trust of teammates.
In order to develop a diverse and inclusive project team, Alexander (2021) suggests team lead-
ers can take the following four steps: (1) establish transparent, fair, and equitable hiring practices 
for hiring your team members; (2) establish pay equity among your team members; (3) provide 
support that helps each individual on your team succeed (this could mean support for team mem-
bers with disabilities, for example); and (4) make sure each team member is given a voice to share 
input and contribute ideas to the project and group processes.
There are good business reasons to strive for a diverse and inclusive team. In a study quoted 
in People Management (2017) that analyzed about 600 business decisions made by 200 teams 
across a swath of different types of companies, researchers found that “when diverse teams (of 
three or more people) made a business decision, they outperformed individual decision-makers 
up to 87 per cent of the time.” The researchers also found that diverse teams made decisions faster 
than individuals and “benefited from a 60 per cent improvement on decision-making.” Reynolds 
and Lewis (2017) found that teams solve problems faster when they’re cognitively diverse.
The project manager needs to know about business principles, but it doesn’t hurt to have 
at least one other person on the team who understands how a business operates. Perhaps this 
person should be a specialist in the area of the system being developed. When developing 
an ecommerce site, for example, a team can enlist the help of someone in marketing, and 
those developing an inventory system can ask a person versed in production and operations to 
provide expertise.
A team ideally should include at least two systems analysts. They can help each other, check 
each other’s work, and shift their workloads. There is certainly a need to have people with pro-
gramming skills on board. Coding is important, but people who know how to conduct walk-
throughs, reviews, testing, and documenting systems are important as well. Some people are good 
at seeing the big picture, and others perform well when tasks are broken down into smaller ones 
for them. Every team should have both types of individuals.
Beyond the basics just described, a project manager should look for people with both experi-
ence and enthusiasm. Experience is especially important when trying to estimate the time required 
for completing a project. Experience in computer programming can mean code is developed five 
times faster than if it is developed by an inexperienced team. A usability expert is also a useful 
addition to the team.
The team must be motivated. One way to keep a team positively oriented throughout the entire 
process is to select good people at the outset. Look for enthusiasm, imagination, and an ability to 
communicate with different kinds of people. These basic attributes hold the potential for success. 
In addition, superior writers and articulate speakers can present proposals and work directly with 
customers, so hiring such individuals is a good idea.
Trust is an important part of a team. All members of the project need to act responsibly and 
agree to do their best and complete their part of the project. People may have different work styles, 
but they all need to agree to work together toward a common goal.


===== BOOK PAGE 91 =====

CHAPTER 3  •  PR ojECT  MAnA gEMEnT     91
Communication Strategies for Managing Teams
Teams have their own personalities because of combining each individual team member with every 
other in a way that creates a totally new network of interactions. A way to organize your thinking 
about teams is to visualize them as always seeking a balance between accomplishing the work at 
hand and maintaining relationships among team members.
In fact, teams often have two leaders, not just one. Usually, one person will emerge who leads 
members to accomplish tasks, and another person will emerge who is concerned with the social 
relationships among group members. Both are necessary for the team. These individuals have been 
labeled by other researchers as task leader and socioemotional leader, respectively. Every team 
is subject to tensions that are an outgrowth of seeking a balance between accomplishing tasks and 
maintaining relationships among team members.
For a team to continue its effectiveness, tensions must be continually resolved. Minimizing 
or ignoring tensions will lead to ineffectiveness and eventual disintegration of the team. Much of 
the tension release necessary can be gained through skillful use of feedback by all team members. 
All members, however, need to agree that the way they interact (that is, the process) is important 
enough to merit some time. Productivity goals for processes are discussed in a later section.
Securing agreement on appropriate member interaction involves creating explicit and implicit 
team norms (collective expectations, values, and ways of behaving) that guide members in their 
relationships. A team’s norms belong to it and will not necessarily transfer from one team to 
another. These norms change over time and are better thought of as a team process of interaction 
than a product.
Norms can be functional or dysfunctional. Just because a particular behavior is a norm for a 
team does not mean it is helping the team to achieve its goals. For example, an expectation that 
junior team members should do all project scheduling may be a team norm. By adhering to this norm, 
the team puts extreme pressure on new members and does not take full advantage of the experience 
of the team. It is a norm that, if continued, could make team members waste precious resources.
Team members need to make norms explicit and periodically assess whether norms are 
functional or dysfunctional in helping the team achieve its goals. The overriding expectation 
for your team must be that change is the norm. Ask yourself whether team norms are helping or 
hindering the team’s progress.
Setting Project Productivity Goals
As you work with your team members on a variety of projects, you or your team leader will 
acquire acumen for projecting what the team can achieve in a specific amount of time. Using the 
hints on methods for estimating time required discussed earlier in this chapter and coupling them 
with experience will enable the team to set worthwhile productivity goals.
Systems analysts are accustomed to thinking about productivity goals for employees who 
show tangible outputs, such as the number of pairs of blue jeans sewn per hour, the number 
of entries keyed in per minute, or the number of items scanned per second. As manufacturing 
productivity rises, however, it is becoming clear that managerial productivity must keep pace. It 
is with this aim in mind that productivity goals for the systems analysis team are set.
A team needs to formulate and agree to goals, and these goals should be based on team members’ 
expertise and former performance, as well as on the nature of the specific project. Goals will vary 
somewhat for each project undertaken because sometimes an entire system will be installed, whereas 
other projects might involve limited modifications to a portion of an existing system.
Motivating Project Team Members
Although motivation is an extremely complex topic, it is a good one to consider, even if briefly, at 
this point. To oversimplify, recall that people join organizations to provide for some of their basic 
needs, such as food, clothing, and shelter. All humans, however, also have higher-level needs, 
including affiliation, control, independence, and creativity. People are motivated to fulfill unmet 
needs on several levels.
Team members can be motivated, at least partially, through participation in goal setting, as 
described in the previous section. The very act of setting a challenging but achievable goal and 
then periodically measuring performance against the goal seems to work in motivating people. 
Goals act almost as magnets in attracting people to achievement.


===== BOOK PAGE 92 =====

92    PART I  •  SYSTEMS AnALYSIS FUnDAMEnTALS
Part of the reason goal setting motivates people is that team members know prior to any 
performance review exactly what is expected of them. The success of goal setting for motivating 
can also be ascribed to affording each team member some autonomy in achieving the goals. 
Although a goal is predetermined, the means to achieve it may not be. In this instance, team 
members are free to use their own expertise and experience to meet their goals.
Setting goals can motivate team members by clarifying for them and others what must be 
done to get results. Goals define the level of achievement that is expected of team members. This 
use of goals simplifies the working atmosphere, and it electrifies it with the possibility that what 
is expected can indeed be done.
Managing Ecommerce Projects
Many of the approaches and techniques discussed so far are transferable to ecommerce project 
management. You should be cautioned, however, that although there are many similarities, there are 
also many differences. One difference is that the data used by ecommerce systems are scattered all 
over an organization. Therefore, you are not just managing data in a self-contained department or even 
in one solitary unit. Hence, organization politics may come into play because units often feel protec-
tive of the data they generate and do not understand the need to share them across the organization.
Another stark difference is that ecommerce project teams typically need more staff from across 
the organization and with a variety of skills, including developers, consultants, database experts, 
and system integrators. Stable project groups that exist within a cohesive IS group or systems 
development team are the exception rather than the rule. In addition, because so much help may be 
required initially, ecommerce project managers need to build partnerships externally and internally 
well ahead of the implementation, perhaps sharing talent across projects to defray costs of ecom-
merce implementations and to muster the required number of people with the necessary expertise. 
The potential for organization politics to drive a wedge between team members is very real.
One way to prevent politics from sabotaging a project is for the ecommerce project manager 
to emphasize the integration of the ecommerce system with the organization’s internal systems 
and in so doing emphasize the organizational aspect embedded in the ecommerce project. As one 
ecommerce project manager told us, “Designing the front end [what the consumer sees] is the 
pauses for the customary groan from the assembled group, then 
continues. “But seriously, these goals are impossible to meet. You 
could have at least asked us what we thought, Hy. We may even 
know better than you what’s possible.”
“This is a pressing problem, Fiona,” Hy replies. “Polite polling 
of team members was out of the question. Something had to be done 
quickly. So, I went ahead with these. I say we submit our schedule to 
management based on this. We can push back deadlines later if we 
have to. But this way, they’ll know we’re committed to accomplish-
ing a lot during the off-season.”
As a fourth team member listening to the foregoing exchange, 
formulate three suggestions that would help Hy improve his 
approach to goal formation and presentation. How well motivated 
do you think the team will be if they share Fiona’s view of Hy’s 
goals? What are the possible ramifications of supplying manage-
ment with overly optimistic goals? Write one paragraph devoted to 
short-term effects and another one discussing the long-term effects 
of setting unrealistically high goals.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 3.5 
Goal Tending
“Here’s what I think we can accomplish in the next five 
weeks,” says Hy Sticking, the leader of your systems analysis 
team, as he confidently pulls out a schedule listing each team mem-
ber’s name alongside a list of short-term goals. Just a week ago, 
your systems analysis team went through an intense meeting on 
expediting the project schedule for the Kitchener Redwings, an 
Ontario hockey organization whose management is pressuring you 
to produce a prototype.
The three other members of the team look at the chart in 
surprise. Finally, one of the members, Rip Shinpadd, speaks: “I’m 
in shock. We each have so much to do as it is—and now this.”
Hy replies defensively, “We’ve got to aim high, Rip. They’re in 
the off-season. It’s the only time to get them. If we set our goals too 
low, we won’t finish the system prototype, let alone the system itself, 
before another hockey season passes. The idea is to give the Kitchener 
Redwings the fighting edge through the use of their new system.”
Fiona Wrink, another team member, enters the discussion, 
saying, “Goodness knows their players can’t give them that!” She


===== BOOK PAGE 93 =====

CHAPTER 3  •  PR ojECT  MAnA gEMEnT     93
easy part of all this. The real challenge comes from integrating ecommerce strategically into all 
the organization’s systems.”
A fourth difference between traditional project management and ecommerce project manage-
ment centers on security concerns. The ecommerce system will be linking with the outside world 
via the internet, so security is of the utmost importance. Developing and implementing a security 
plan before the new system is in place is a project in and of itself and must be managed as such.
Creating a Project Charter
Part of the planning process is to agree on what will be done and at what time. Analysts who are 
external consultants, as well as those who are organization members, need to specify what they will 
eventually deliver and when they will deliver it. The entire team as well as the client need to be on 
board. This chapter has elaborated on ways to estimate the delivery date for the completed system 
and also how to identify organization goals and assess the feasibility of the proposed system.
The project charter is a written narrative that clarifies the following questions:
1. What does the user expect of the project (that is, what are the objectives)? What will the 
system do to meet the needs (achieve the objectives)?
2. What is the scope (or what are the boundaries) of the project? (What does the user consider 
to be beyond the project’s reach?)
3. What analysis methods will the analyst use to interact with users in gathering data and 
developing and testing the system?
4. Who are the key participants? How much time are users willing and able to commit to 
participating?
5. What are the project deliverables? (What new or updated software, hardware, procedures, 
and documentation do the users expect to have available for interaction when the project is 
done?)
6. Who will evaluate the system, and how will they evaluate it? What are the steps in the 
assessment process? How will the results be communicated, and to whom?
7. What is the estimated project timeline? How often will analysts report project milestones?
8. Who will train the users?
9. Who will maintain the system?
The project charter describes in a written document the expected results of the systems project 
(deliverables) and the time frame for delivery. It essentially becomes a contract between the chief 
analyst (or project manager) and the analysis team, with the organization users requesting the 
new system.
THE SYSTEMS PROPOSAL
The project charter serves the purpose of identifying objectives, determining scope, and assigning 
responsibilities, but an analyst still needs to prepare a systems proposal that includes much of the 
detail about system needs, options, and recommendations. This section covers both the content 
and style that make up a systems proposal.
What to Include in a Systems Proposal
A written systems proposal has 10 main sections. Each section has a particular function, and 
eventually the proposal should be arranged in the following order:
1. Cover letter
2. Title page of project
3. Table of contents
4. Executive summary (including recommendations)
5. Outline of systems study with appropriate documentation
6. Detailed results of the systems study
7. Systems alternatives (three or four possible solutions)
8. Systems analysts’ recommendations
9. Proposal summary
10. Appendices (assorted documentation, summary of phases, correspondence, and so on)


===== BOOK PAGE 94 =====

94    PART I  •  SYSTEMS AnALYSIS FUnDAMEnTALS
A cover letter to managers and the IT task force should accompany the systems proposal. 
It should list the people who did the study and summarize the objectives of the study. Keep the 
cover letter concise and friendly.
Include on the title page the name of the project, the names of the systems analysis team mem-
bers, and the date the proposal is submitted. The proposal title must accurately express the content 
of the proposal, but it can also exhibit some imagination. The table of contents can be useful to 
readers of long proposals. If the proposal is less than 10 pages long, omit the table of contents.
The executive summary, in 250 to 375 words, provides the who, what, when, where, why, and 
how of the proposal, just as would the first paragraph in a news story. It should also include the recom-
mendations of the systems analysts and desired management action because some people will only 
have time to read the summary. It should be written last, after the rest of the proposal is complete.
The outline of the systems study provides information about all the methods used in the study 
and who or what was studied. Any questionnaires, interviews, sampling of archival data, observa-
tion, or prototyping used in the systems study should be discussed in this section.
This detailed results section describes what the systems analyst has found out about human 
and systems needs through all the methods described in the preceding section. Conclusions about 
problems workers experience when interacting with technologies and systems that have come to 
the fore through the study should be noted here. This section should list the problems or suggest 
opportunities that call forth the alternatives presented in the next section.
In the systems alternatives section of the proposal, present two or three alternative solutions 
that directly address the aforementioned problems. The alternatives you present should include 
one that recommends keeping the system the same. Each alternative should be explored separately. 
Describe the costs and benefits of each situation. Because there are usually trade-offs involved in 
any solution, be sure to include the advantages and disadvantages of each.
Each alternative must clearly indicate what users and managers must do to implement it. 
The wording should be as clear as possible, such as “Buy notebook computers for all middle 
managers,” “Purchase packaged software to support users in managing inventory,” or “Modify 
the existing system through funding in-house programming efforts.”
After the systems analysis team has weighed the alternatives, it will have a definite profes-
sional opinion about which solution is most workable. The systems analysts’ recommendations 
section expresses the recommended solution. Include the reasons supporting the team’s recom-
mendation so that it is easy to understand why it is being made. The recommendation should 
flow logically from the preceding analysis of alternative solutions, and it should clearly relate the 
human–computer interaction findings to the choice offered.
The proposal summary is a brief statement that mirrors the content of the executive sum-
mary. It gives the objectives of the study and the recommended solution. You should once more 
stress the project’s importance and feasibility, along with the value of the recommendations for 
reaching the users’ goals and improving the business. Conclude the proposal on a positive note.
The appendices are the last part of the systems proposal, and they can include any information 
that you feel may be of interest to specific individuals but that is not essential for understanding 
the systems study and what is being proposed.
Once the systems proposal is written, carefully select who should receive the report. If social 
distancing permits, personally hand the report to the people you have selected. Your visibility is 
important for the acceptance and eventual success of the system.
You can propose a special meeting of key decision makers regarding the systems project for 
the purpose of delivering the results of the systems proposal. Develop a separate oral presentation 
(illustrated with PowerPoint slides or some other presentation software such as Keynote) that fea-
tures highlights of your written report. Keep your presentation brief, 30 to 40 minutes maximum, 
with the majority of time devoted to questions. Never read your report aloud. It is preferable to 
prepare and deliver a dynamic slide presentation that takes advantage of the fact that you can 
interact with key decision makers face to face.
Using Figures for Effective Communication
The emphasis so far in this section has been on considering your audience when composing a 
systems proposal. Tables and graphs as well as words are important in capturing and communicating 
the basics of the proposed system. Never underestimate good design.


===== BOOK PAGE 95 =====

CHAPTER 3  •  PR ojECT  MAnA gEMEnT     95
FIGURE 3.26
Guidelines for creating effective 
tables.
T y p e o f S e t 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
4 0 k g g r a y 3 . 5 3 . 4 3 . 7 3 . 0 2 . 5 2 . 0
4 8 k g g r a y 5 . 9 5 . 5 5 . 1 4 . 6 2 . 0 2 . 0
5 5 k g g r a y 3 . 9 4 . 8 5 . 5 3 . 5 4 . 2 5 . 5
6 8 k g g r a y 1 . 0 1 . 9 2 . 2 2 . 5 1 . 3 1 . 2
1 0 0 k g g r a y 1 . 2 1 . 8 1 . 5 0 . 7 1 . 2 1 . 5
5 5 k g r , w , b * – – – 3 . 4 6 . 5 2 . 6
1 0 0 k g r , w , b – – – 0 . 8 1 . 8 1 . 2
Table 4
Number of Sets of Barbells Sold by Weight and Color
for the Years 2017–2022 Inclusive
* r,w,b, stands for red, white, and blue.
Make the title
descriptive.
The use of a box
enhances the
table.
Label the rows
and columns.
T ry to ﬁt the table
vertically on a
single page.Use footnotes to
explain information.
Integrating figures into your proposal helps demonstrate that you are responsive to the 
different ways people absorb information. Figures in the report supplement written information 
and must always be interpreted in words; they should never stand alone.
Effective use of Tables. Although tables are technically not visual aids, they provide a different 
way of grouping and presenting analyzed data that an analyst wants to communicate to proposal 
readers.
Tables use labeled columns and rows to present statistical or alphabetical data in an organized 
way. Each table must be numbered according to the order in which it appears in the proposal and 
should be meaningfully titled. Figure 3.26 shows the appropriate layout and labeling for a table.
The following are some guidelines for tables:
1. Integrate tables into the body of the proposal. Don’t relegate them to the appendices.
2. Try to fit an entire table vertically on a single page, if possible.
3. Number and title a table at the top of the page. Make the title descriptive and meaningful.
4. Label each row and column. Use more than one line for a title, if necessary.
5. Use a boxed table if room permits. Vertically ruled columns will enhance readability.
6. Use footnotes, if necessary, to explain detailed information contained in the table.
Several methods for comparing costs and benefits were presented in previous sections. Tabled 
results of such comparisons should appear in the systems proposal. If a break-even analysis 
is done, a table illustrating results of the analysis should be included. Payback can be shown in 
tables that serve as additional support for graphs. A short table comparing computer systems or 
options might also be included in the systems proposal.


===== BOOK PAGE 96 =====

96    PART I  •  SYSTEMS AnALYSIS FUnDAMEnTALS
Effective use of Graphs. There are many different kinds of graphs, including line graphs, column 
graphs, bar charts, pie charts, and area charts. Line graphs, column graphs, and bar charts compare 
variables, whereas pie charts and area charts illustrate the percentage composition of an entity.
The following guidelines will help you include effective graphs in a proposal (see Figure 3.27):
1. Choose a style of graph that communicates your intended meaning well.
2. Integrate the graph into the body of the proposal.
3. Give the graph a sequential figure number and a meaningful title.
4. Label each axis and any lines, columns, bars, or pieces of the pie on the graph.
5. Include a key to indicate different-colored lines, shaded bars, or crosshatched areas.
Much of the detail that goes into a systems proposal is obtained through interviews, question-
naires, sampling, discovery of other hard data, and observation. These topics are discussed in the 
next two chapters.
FIGURE 3.27
Guidelines for developing  
effective line graphs.
Cost
($)
70,000
60,000
Break-Even
Point
50,000
40,000
30,000
20,000
10,000
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Y ear
Figure 5
The proposed system is expected to
reach the break-even point in 2023.
Include a
meaningful title.
Include a key.
Label the axes.
Cost of proposed 
system
Cost of current 
system
Summary
The five major project management fundamentals a systems analyst must handle are (1) project initiation—
defining a problem, (2) determining project feasibility, (3) activity planning and control, (4) project schedul-
ing, and (5) managing systems analysis team members. When faced with questions of how businesses can 
meet their goals and solve systems problems, an analyst creates a problem definition. A problem definition 
is a formal statement of the problem, including (1) the issues of the present situation, (2) the objectives for 
each issue, (3) the requirements that must be included in all proposed systems, and (4) the constraints that 
limit system development.


===== BOOK PAGE 97 =====

CHAPTER 3  •  PR ojECT  MAnA gEMEnT     97
Selecting a project is a difficult decision because more projects will be requested than can actually be 
done. Five important criteria for project selection are (1) that the requested project be backed by manage-
ment, (2) that it be timed appropriately for a commitment of resources, (3) that it move the business toward 
attainment of its strategic goals, (4) that it be practical, and (5) that it be important enough to be considered 
over other possible projects.
If a requested project meets these criteria, a feasibility study of its operational, technical, and economic 
merits can be done. Through the feasibility study, a systems analyst gathers data to enable management to 
decide whether to proceed with a full systems study. By inventorying equipment already on hand and on 
order, systems analysts can better determine whether new, modified, or current computer hardware is to be 
recommended.
There are advantages and disadvantages to purchasing computer hardware. Alternatively, the analyst 
may help the organization weigh the advantages and disadvantages of renting time and space through use 
of a cloud service provider. Four main categories of cloud computing are Software as a Service (SaaS), 
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS), and Disaster Recovery as a Service 
(DRaaS). As user sophistication grows, some companies are adopting bring your own device (BYOD) 
approaches to boost morale of employees and lower the initial cost to the organization of purchasing 
mobile devices. Security risks from untrained users are likely the biggest threat to organizations adopting 
a BYOD policy.
Cloud services and other hardware vendors will supply support services such as preventive maintenance 
and user training that are typically negotiated separately. Software can be created as a custom product, 
purchased as a commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) software package, or outsourced to a SaaS provider.
Preparing a systems proposal means identifying all the costs and benefits of a number of alter -
natives. A systems analyst has a number of methods available to forecast future costs, benefits, vol-
umes of transactions, and economic variables that affect costs and benefits. Costs and benefits can be 
tangible (quantifiable) or intangible (nonquantifiable and resistant to direct comparison). A systems 
analyst can use many methods for analyzing costs and benefits, including break-even analysis and the 
payback method.
Project planning includes the estimation of time required for each of the analyst’s activities, scheduling 
the activities, and expediting them, if necessary, to ensure that a project is completed on time.
To complete projects on time, within budget, and with the features that are promised, a project 
needs to be broken down into smaller tasks or activities. These tasks together make up a work breakdown 
structure (WBS), usually through decomposition. There are different types of work breakdwon structures; 
they can be product oriented or process oriented. A process-oriented WBS is typical in systems analysis 
and design.
One technique available to a systems analyst for scheduling tasks is a Gantt chart, which displays 
activities as bars on a graph. Another technique, called Program Evaluation and Review Technique 
(PERT), displays activities as arrows on a network. PERT charts are also called network diagrams. 
PERT helps an analyst determine the critical path and slack time, which is the information required 
for effective project control. Both Gantt charts and PERT charts can be developed with Microsoft 
Project.
Earned value management (EVM) is a technique used to help the analyst determine progress (or 
setbacks) on a project and involves project cost, the project schedule, and the performance of the project 
team. The four key measures in EVM are budget at completion (BAC), planned value (PV), actual cost 
(AC), and earned value (EV). These four measures or variables are the core of EVM. They can be used to 
calculate a number of performance measures, including cost variance (CV), schedule variance (SV), the cost 
performance index (CPI), and the schedule performance index (SPI).
Creating a project charter that contains user expectations and analyst deliverables is recommended. 
Reasons computer programmers cited for projects that had failed included unrealistic management deadlines, 
adding unneeded personnel to a project that is trying to meet an unrealistic deadline, and not permitting 
developer teams to seek expert help outside their immediate group. Project failures can usually be avoided 
by examining the motivations for requested projects and understanding a team’s motives for recommending 
or avoiding a particular project. Systems analysts can improve their team’s prospects for a successful project 
by emphasizing cognitive, as well as gender and ethnic, diversity and inclusion in the team members they 
select. Teams must be motivated to achieve their goals. One way to do this is to include team members in 
goal setting.
A systems analyst must follow these steps when putting together an effective systems proposal: 
Effectively organize the proposal content and write and deliver the proposal in an appropriate business 
style. To be effective, a proposal should be written in a clear and understandable manner, and its content 
should be divided into 10 functional sections. Visual considerations are important when putting together 
a proposal. Face-to-face meetings with key decision makers provide an opportunity to orally present the 
systems proposal in a brief and compelling way.


===== BOOK PAGE 98 =====

98    PART I  •  SYSTEMS AnALYSIS FUnDAMEnTALS
Review Questions
1. What are the five major project fundamentals?
2. List three ways to find out about problems or opportunities that might call for a systems solution.
3. List the five criteria for systems project selection.
4. Define technical feasibility.
5. Define economic feasibility.
6. Define operational feasibility.
7. List four criteria for evaluating system hardware.
8. What two main options do organizations have for acquiring or using computer hardware?
9. What does COTS stand for?
10. List five of the many benefits of cloud computing for organizations.
11. List three of the many drawbacks of cloud computing for organizations.
12. What does BYOD stand for?
13. What are the benefits of BYOD to an organization?
14. What are the benefits of BYOD to an employee?
15. What is the biggest drawback of BYOD for an organization?
16. What are four main categories of cloud computing?
17. Define tangible costs and tangible benefits. Give an example of each one.
18. Define intangible costs and intangible benefits. Give an example of each one.
19. List four techniques for comparing the costs and benefits of a proposed system.
20. When is calculating the payback period useful?
21. What are the three drawbacks of using the payback method?
22. What is a work breakdown structure (WBS), and when should it be used?
23. What is a Gantt chart?
24. When is a PERT diagram useful for systems projects?
25. List three advantages of using a PERT diagram over a Gantt chart for scheduling systems projects.
26. Define the term critical path.
27. How does a project manager assess the risk of things going wrong and take that into consideration 
when planning the time needed to complete a project?
Keywords and Phrases
actual cost (AC)
benchmarking
break-even analysis
bring your own device (BYOD)
bring your own technology (BYOT)
budget
budget at completion (BAC)
cloud computing
cost performance index (CPI)
cost variance (CV)
critical path
Disaster Recovery as a Service (DRaaS)
earned value (EV)
earned value management (EVM)
ecommerce project management
economic feasibility
estimate at completion (EAC)
estimate to complete (ETC)
expediting
forecasting
function point analysis
Gantt chart
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)
Hardware as a Service (HaaS)
intangible benefits
intangible costs
moving average
operational feasibility
payback
planned value (PV)
Platform as a Service (PaaS)
Program Evaluation and Review Technique 
(PERT)
problem definition
productivity goals
project charter
schedule performance index (SPI)
schedule variance (SV)
socioemotional leader
Software as a Service (SaaS)
systems proposal
tangible benefits
tangible costs
task leader
team norms
team process
technical feasibility
vendor support
work breakdown structure (WBS)


===== BOOK PAGE 99 =====

CHAPTER 3  •  PR ojECT  MAnA gEMEnT     99
28. What costs need to be estimated to prepare a budget?
29. Why is preparing a budget so important for a systems analyst who is managing a project?
30. What three instances call for expediting a systems project?
31. What does crash time mean when expediting a project?
32. What is earned value management (EVM)?
33. What are the four key measures in earned value management?
34. For what purposes can a systems analyst use earned value management?
35. List the two types of team leaders.
36. What is meant by a dysfunctional team norm?
37. What is meant by team process?
38. What are three dimensions you could assess to build a diverse project team?
39. What are three reasons that goal setting seems to motivate systems analysis team members?
40. What are four ways in which ecommerce project management differs from traditional project 
management?
41. What elements are contained in a project charter?
42. For what purpose is a fishbone diagram used?
43. What are the three steps a systems analyst must follow to put together an effective systems proposal?
44. List the 10 main sections of a systems proposal.
Problems
1. Williwonk’s Chocolates of St. Louis makes an assortment of chocolate candy and candy novelties. 
The company has six in-city stores, five stores in major metropolitan airports, and a small mail-
order branch. Williwonk’s has a small, computerized information system that tracks inventory in 
its plant, helps schedule production, and so on, but this system is not tied directly into any of its 
retail outlets. The mail-order system is handled manually, and any emailed order forms received 
through the website are answered via email by clerical personnel, with orders being forwarded to the 
appropriate department.
Recently, several Williwonk’s stores experienced a rash of complaints from mail-order 
customers that the candy was spoiled upon arrival, that it did not arrive when promised, or that 
it never arrived; the company also received several letters complaining that candy in various 
airports tasted stale. Williwonk’s has been selling a new, low-carb, dietetic form of chocolate 
made with sugar-free artificial sweetener. Sales have been brisk, but there have been problems 
shipping the wrong type of chocolate to an address for a person with diabetes. There were 
a number of complaints, and Williwonk’s sent a number of free boxes of chocolate to ease 
the situation.
Management would like to sell products online but only has a basic website with informa-
tion about the company and an order form that can be downloaded, printed, filled out by the cus-
tomer, and returned via email, web ordering does not exist. One of the senior executives would 
like to sell customized chocolates with the name of a person on each piece. Although the produc-
tion area has assured management that this could be easily done, there is no method to order 
customized chocolates.
Another senior executive has mentioned that Williwonk’s has partnered with several European 
chocolate manufacturers and will be importing chocolate from a variety of countries. At present, this 
must be done over the phone, by email, or by mail. The executive wants an internal, internet-based 
network that will enable employees to order directly from the partner companies. All this has led a 
number of managers to request trend analysis. Too much inventory results in stale chocolate, and at 
other times there is a shortage of a certain kind of chocolate.
Seasonal and holiday variation trends would help Williwonk’s maintain an adequate inventory. 
The inventory control manager has insisted that all changes must be implemented before the next 
holiday season. “The time for this to be complete is an absolute due date,” remarked Candy Kane, a 
senior manager. “Make sure that everything works perfectly before the site goes public,” she contin-
ues. “I don’t want any customers receiving the wrong chocolates!” In addition, the order processing 
manager has mentioned that the system must be secure.
You have been working for two weeks with Williwonk’s on some minor modifications 
for its inventory information system when you overhear two managers discussing these occur -
rences. List the possible opportunities or problems among them that might lend themselves to 
systems projects.
2. Where is most of the feedback on problems with Williwonk’s products coming from in Problem 1? 
How reliable are the sources? Explain in a paragraph.


===== BOOK PAGE 100 =====

100    PART I  •  SYSTEMS AnALYSIS FUnDAMEnTALS
3. After getting to know Williwonk’s management people better, you have approached them with your 
ideas on possible systems improvements that could address some of the problems or opportunities 
given in Problem 1.
a. In two paragraphs, provide your suggestions for systems projects. Make any realistic assumptions 
necessary.
b. Are there any problems or opportunities discussed in Problem 1 that are not suitable? Explain 
your response.
4. Create a problem definition for Williwonk’s, as described in Problem 1. Estimate the weights of 
importance. Include at least one requirement and one constraint.
5. Create a list of user requirements for the problem definition created in Problem 4.
6. Delicato, Inc., a manufacturer of precise measuring instruments for scientific purposes, has presented 
you with a list of attributes that its managers think are probably important in selecting a vendor for 
computer hardware and software or a cloud service provider. The criteria are listed here, but not in 
order of importance:
1. Low price
2. Precisely written software for engineering applications
3. Vendor performs routine maintenance on hardware
4. Training for Delicato employees
a. Critique the list of attributes in a paragraph.
b. Using its initial input, help Delicato, Inc. draw up a more suitable list of criteria for selecting 
computer hardware and software vendors to purchase from.
c. Using its initial input, help Delicato, Inc. draw up a more suitable list of criteria for selecting 
cloud vendors who could provide HaaS and SaaS.
d. In a paragraph, state how the list of attributes for selecting a computer hardware vendor to pur-
chase from should differ from the list of attributes for selecting a cloud provider for HaaS.
e. In a paragraph, state how the list of attributes for selecting a computer software vendor to pur-
chase applications from should differ from the list of attributes for selecting a cloud provider 
for SaaS.
7. SoftWear Silhouettes is a rapidly growing mail-order house specializing in all-cotton clothing. Man-
agement would like to expand sales to the web by creating an ecommerce site. The company has two 
full-time systems analysts and one computer programmer. Company offices are located in a small, 
remote New England town in the United States, with a declining population, and the employees who 
handle the traditional mail-order business have little computer training.
a. Considering the company’s situation, draw up a list of software attributes that SoftWear Silhou-
ettes should emphasize in its choice of software to create a website and integrate the mail-order 
business with business from the website.
b. Would you recommend COTS software, custom software, or outsourcing to a SaaS provider? 
State your choice and defend it in a paragraph.
c. List the variables that contributed to your response in part b.
8. The following is 12 years’ demand for Viking Village, a civilization-building computer game now 
available for tablets and smartphones:
Year Demand
2011 20,123
2012 18,999
2013 20,900
2014 31,200
2015 38,000
2016 41,200
2017 49,700
2018 46,400
2019 50,200
2020 52,300
2021 49,200
2022 57,600
a. Graph the demand data for Viking Village.
b. Determine the linear trend for Viking Village, using a three-year moving average.
9. Do the data for Viking Village appear to have a cyclical variation? Explain.


===== BOOK PAGE 101 =====

CHAPTER 3  •  PR ojECT  MAnA gEMEnT     101
FIGURE 3. EX1
Data to help in the organization 
of a design project for creating 
an information system that tracks 
shipments of frozen foods to 
warehouses.
Description
Draw data ﬂow
Draw decision tree
Revise tree
Write up project
Organize data dictionary
Do output prototype
Revise output design
Write use cases
Design database
Task
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
Must Follow
None
A
B
C, I
A
None
F
None
H, E, and G
Time (Weeks)
5
4
10
4
7
2
9
10
8
10. Interglobal Health Consultants has asked for your help in comparing its present computer system 
with a new one its board of directors would like to see implemented. The proposed system costs and 
present system costs are as follows:
Item Proposed System Costs Present System Costs
Year 1
Equipment lease $20,000 $11,500
Salaries 30,000 50,000
Overhead 4,000 3,000
Development 30,000 —
Year 2
Equipment lease $20,000 $10,500
Salaries 33,000 55,000
Overhead 4,400 3,300
Development 12,000 —
Year 3
Equipment lease $20,000 $10,500
Salaries 36,000 60,000
Overhead 4,900 3,600
Development — —
Year 4
Equipment lease $20,000 $10,500
Salaries 39,000 66,000
Overhead 5,500 4,000
Development — —
  Graph the costs of the proposed and present systems and show the break-even point.
11. The following are system benefits for Interglobal Health Consultants (from Problem 10):
Year Benefits
1 $55,000
2 75,000
3 80,000
4 85,000
  Use the costs of Interglobal Global Health Consultants’ proposed system from Problem 10 to 
determine the payback period. (Use the payback method.)
12. Brian F. O’Byrne (“F,” he says, stands for “frozen”) owns a frozen foods company and wants to 
develop an information system for tracking shipments to warehouses.
a. Using the data from the table in Figure 3.EX1, draw a Gantt chart to help Brian organize his 
design project.


===== BOOK PAGE 102 =====

102    PART I  •  SYSTEMS AnALYSIS FUnDAMEnTALS
b. When is it appropriate to use a Gantt chart? What are the disadvantages of using a Gantt chart? 
Explain in a paragraph.
13. In addition to using a Gantt chart, you’ve drawn a PERT diagram for Brian so that you can commu-
nicate the necessity of keeping an eye on the critical path. Consult Figure 3.EX2, which was derived 
from the data from Figure 3.EX1. List all paths and calculate and identify the critical path.
14. Latifah Musa owns a homeopathic medicine company called Faithhealers. She sells vitamins and 
other relatively nonperishable products for those who want choices regarding alternative medicine. 
Latifah is developing a new system that would require her staff to be retrained. Given the information 
in Figure 3.EX3, make a PERT diagram for her and identify the critical path. If Latifah could find a 
way to save time on the “write use cases” phase, would it help? Why or why not?
15. Using the PERT diagram in Figure 3.EX2 to determine answers:
a. What activities can you expedite to complete the project a week ahead of schedule?
b. Suppose activity E is the least costly activity to expedite. What happens if you try to expedite the 
project by more than one week? Explain.
16. You can help Latifah finish her project faster by expediting. Here are the costs.
Activity Estimated Duration Crash Time Cost per Week
A 6 3 600
B 3 2 100
C 2 2 400
D 3 2 400
E 4 2 200
F 2 2 200
G 5 3 300
H 3 2 400
I 2 2 300
  If Latifah can keep her expediting expenses to $325 per week, she would benefit from expediting 
because she can start a new project earlier than planned. If she goes over the $325 per week limit, it 
would not be worthwhile.
a. Which three activities cannot be expedited at all because they are at their crash times already?
b. Which two activities cannot be expedited because their expediting cost exceeds the daily limit?
c. Which two activities are unlikely candidates for expediting because they are not on the critical 
path?
FIGURE 3. EX3
Tasks to be performed during 
systems development of an order 
fulfillment system.
Description
Interview executives
Interview staff in order fulﬁllment
Design input prototype
Design output prototype
Write use cases
Record staff reactions to prototypes
Develop system
Write up training manual
Train staff working in order fulﬁllment
Task
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
Must Follow
None
None
B
A, C
A, C
D
E, F
B, G
H
Time (Weeks)
6
3
2
3
4
2
5
3
2
FIGURE 3. EX2
The PERT diagram for Brian’s 
frozen foods company.
10
20
30
50
40
7060A
F G
E
B
I
C
D
H


===== BOOK PAGE 103 =====

CHAPTER 3  •  PR ojECT  MAnA gEMEnT     103
d. Set up a table and show step by step which activities should be expedited to shorten the project 
time. What is the minimum time the project will take if Latifah expedites the project as much as 
she can and stays within her limits?
e. Why is Latifah’s limit exceeded if you try to shorten the project by one week more?
17. Latanya Williams is developing a social networking app for tablet computers. She has:
Week or Stage Estimated Cost of Stage Stage Completed
Actual Cost of  
Stage to Date
Week 1 $500 100% 500
Week 2 400 100% 500
Week 3 600 100% 700
Week 4 500 50% 50
Week 5 400 0 Not yet begun
a. Create a table similar to the one in Figure 3.24.
b. Calculate the budget at completion (BAC), planned value (PV), actual cost (AC), and earned value 
(EV) at Week 3.
c. For Week 3, calculate the performance measures of cost variance (CV), schedule variance (SV), 
the cost performance index (CPI), and the schedule performance index (SPI).
d. What can you tell about the budget in Week 3 by using these performance measures?
e. What can you tell about the schedule in Week 3 by using these performance measures?
f. For Week 3, calculate the estimated time to complete (ETC) and estimate at completion (EAC).
18. Using the data in the table from the previous problem:
a. Create a table similar to the one in Figure 3.24 if you haven’t done so already.
b. Calculate the budget at completion (BAC), planned value (PV), actual cost (AC), and earned value 
(EV) at Week 4.
c. For Week 4, calculate the performance measures of cost variance (CV), schedule variance (SV), 
the cost performance index (CPI), and the schedule performance index (SPI).
d. What can you say about the budget in Week 4 by using these performance measures?
e. What can you say about the schedule in Week 4 by using these performance measures?
f. For Week 4, calculate the estimated time to complete (ETC) and estimate at completion (EAC).
19. Angus McIndoe wants to modernize his popular restaurant by adapting it more closely to the prefer-
ences of his repeat customers. This would involve keeping track of his customers’ likes and dislikes. 
Information such as where they like to sit, what they like to eat, and when they normally arrive at the 
restaurant are all items of interest to Angus because he believes this information will help him better 
serve his customers. Angus has asked you to develop a system for him that will help make his cus-
tomers happy while increasing his business.
You have heard what Angus has to say about his customers. He can certainly keep track of addi-
tional preferences. Develop a problem definition for Angus similar to the one developed for Cath-
erine’s Catering in this chapter.
20. Recently, two analysts just out of college have joined your systems analysis group at the newly 
formed company Mega Phone. When talking to you about the group, they mention that some things 
strike them as odd. One is that group members seem to look up to two group leaders, Bill Pei and 
Penny Weiss, not just one.
Their observation is that Bill seems pretty relaxed, whereas Penny is always planning and sched-
uling activities. They have also observed that everyone “just seems to know what to do” when they 
get into a meeting, even though no instructions are given. Finally, they have remarked on the open-
ness of the group in addressing problems as they arise, instead of letting things get out of hand.
a. By way of explanation to the new team members, label the types of leaders Bill Pei and Penny 
Weiss appear to be, respectively.
b. Explain the statement that “everyone just seems to know what to do.” What is guiding their 
behavior?
c. What concept best describes the openness of the group that the new team members commented on?
21. “I think it’s only fair to write up all the alternatives you’ve considered,” says Lou Cite, a personnel 
supervisor for DayGlow Paints. “After all, you’ve been working on this systems thing for a while 
now, and I think my supervisor and everyone else would be interested to see what you’ve found out.” 
You are talking with Lou as you prepare to put together the final systems proposal that your team will 
be presenting to upper management.
a. In a paragraph, explain to Lou why your proposal will not (and should not) contain all the alterna-
tives that your team has considered.
b. In a paragraph, discuss the sorts of alternatives that should appear in the final systems proposal.


===== BOOK PAGE 104 =====

104    PART I  •  SYSTEMS AnALYSIS FUnDAMEnTALS
Group Projects
1. The Kim Clinic is a dental practice run by Drs. Ari and Sung-Ho Kim, and they need to keep the 
necessary patient and insurance data safe and secure. They looked into online, cloud-based backups: 
SOS Online Backup, Spare Backup, MozyPro, and iDrive. With your group, research the cost of 
these or other cloud-based services and help Drs. Ari and Sung-Ho make a decision. What are the 
intangible costs and benefits of backing up this way? Should they use a backup service or find some 
other way? Write two paragraphs defending your group’s analysis and recommendations.
2. Explore four or five V oice over IP (V oIP) providers with your group.
a. Make a list of costs, including the setup fee, monthly cost of the basic plan, monthly cost of the 
unlimited plan, and cost of an adapter or other fees, if required.
b. Make a list of attributes, such as free in-network calls, international calling, virtual telephone 
numbers, teleconferencing, support for caller ID, and so on.
c. Write a paragraph with your group to explain how a person would use all the quantitative and 
qualitative information to make an informed decision about which V oIP provider to select. Are any 
other variables important? What type of software could be used to help compare these services?
3. With your group, choose one V oIP provider you would recommend to a client based on the analysis 
in Group Project 2, parts a and b.
4. With your group members, explore project management software such as Microsoft Project.
a. What features are available? Work with your group to list them.
b. Have your group evaluate the usefulness of the software for managing a systems analysis and 
design team project. In a paragraph, state whether the software you are evaluating facilitates team 
member communication and management of the team, specifically: evaluate its capacity to coor-
dinate activities, time, and resources. Also state which particular features support these aspects of 
any systems project. Also note whether the software falls short of these criteria in any regard.
5. Brainstorm with your group about problems that can possibly occur when constructing a website for 
a travel company that wants to sell vacations online for the next big travel period (either December or 
June).
a. Make a list of the problems your group identified.
b. Draw a fishbone diagram with your group that depicts all the problems the group identified in 
part a.
Selected Bibliography
Alexander, M. (2021, April 27). How to build more diverse and inclusive project teams. https://www 
.techrepublic.com/article/how-to-build-more-diverse-and-inclusive-project-teams/?ftag=TRE684d531
&bhid=29183969873549096909230967882050&mid=13348978&cid=2227018232.
Alhomdy, S., Thabit, F., Hasan Abdulrazzak, F., Haldorai, A., & Jagtap, S. (2021). The role of cloud com-
puting technology: A savior to fight the lockdown in COVID 19 crisis, the benefits, characteristics 
and application. International Journal of Intelligent Networks, 2, 1–177. https://doi.org/10.1016/j 
.ijin.2021.08.001.
Alter, S. (2002). Information systems: The foundation of e-business (4th ed.). Prentice Hall.
Bales, R. F. (1970). Personality and interpersonal behavior. Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Bergstein, B. (2012, May 21). IBM faces the perils of “bring your own device. ” https://www.technology 
review.com/s/427790/ibm-faces-the-perils-of-bring-your-own-device.
Blair, R., & Hewitt, J. (2021, July 29). Market guide for disaster recovery as a service. https://www 
.recoverypoint.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/Gartner-Market-Guide-for-DRaaS.pdf.
Brownsword, L., Sledge, C., & Oberndorf, P. (2000, October). An activity framework for COTS-based systems 
(CMU/SEI-2000-TR-010). http://resources.sei.cmu.edu/library/asset-view.cfm?assetID=5225.
Cearley, D. W. (2010). Cloudcomputing: Key initiative overview. https://www.gartner.com/it/initiatives/pdf 
/KeyInitiativeOverview_CloudComputing.pdf.
Djurovic, A. (2020, August 21). 20+ astonishing agile adoption statistics for 2022. https://goremotely 
.net/blog/agile-adoption/.
Fisher, M. (2017, May 1). What happens when work becomes a nonstop chat room. New York Magazine. 
http://nymag.com/selectall/2017/05/what-has-slack-done-to-the-office.html.
Fry, J. (2011, March). Survey: Cloud really is shaking up the IT role—with some new job titles to prove it. 
http://datacenterdialog.blogspot.com/2011/03/survey-cloud-really-is-shaking-up-it.html.
Germonprez, M., Kendall, J., Kendall, K., Warner, B., & Mathiassen, L. (2011). Organizational  
participation in open communities: Conceptual framing and early findings. http://aisel.aisnet.org 
/amcis2011_submissions/242.


===== BOOK PAGE 105 =====

CHAPTER 3  •  PR ojECT  MAnA gEMEnT     105
Glass, R. (1999). Evolving a new theory of project success. Communications of the ACM, 42(11), 17–19.
Kaneshige, T. (2012, March 6). The BYOD sea change has already started. CIO. https://www.cio.com 
/article/284399/consumer-technology-the-byod-sea-change-has-already-started.html.
Levine, D. M., Stephan, D. F., & Szabat, K. A. (2021). Statistics for managers using Microsoft Excel. 
Pearson.
Linberg, K. R. (1999). Software perceptions about software project failure: A case study. Journal of  
Systems and Software, 49(2/3), 177–192.
Linthicum, D. (2012, May 22). 3 easy steps to creating your cloud strategy. InfoWorld. www.infoworld 
.com/d/cloud-computing/3-easy-steps-creating-your-cloud-strategy-193593.
McBreen, P. (2003). Questioning extreme programming. Addison-Wesley.
Moyse, I. (2012, March 16). Why more education is needed on cloud. www.cloudcomputing-news.net 
/news/2012/mar/16/employing-cloud/.
Moyse, I. (2012, March 13). How consumerisation is driving cloud acceptance. www.cloudcomputing 
-news.net/news/2012/mar/13/how-consumerisation-driving-cloud-acceptance.
Nash, K. S. (2010, May 15). Cloud computing: What CIOs need to know about integration. CIO. http://
www.cio.com/article/2418286/software-as-a-service/cloud-computing—what-cios-need-to-know-
about-integration.html.
National Aeronautics and Space Administration. (n.d.). NASA open source software. http://ti.arc.nasa.gov 
/opensource/.
People Management. (2017, October 23). Diversity drives better decisions. https://www.peoplemanage 
ment.co.uk/article/1742040/diversity-drives-better-decisions.
Perez, J. C. (1997, January 13). Heineken’s HOPS software keeps a-head on inventory. PC Week, 14(2), 
31, 34.
Peters, M. (2011, February 26). How cloud computing and web services are changing the IT job market. 
http://mashable.com/2011/02/26/it-job-market/.
Reynolds, A., & Lewis, D. (2017, March 30). Teams solve problems faster when they’re more cognitively 
diverse. Harvard Business Review. https://hbr.org/2017/03/teams-solve-problems-faster-when 
-theyre-more-cognitively-diverse.
Schein, E. H. (1988). Process consultation: Its role in organization development (V ol. 1, 2nd ed.).  
Addison-Wesley, 1988.
Shtub, A., Bard, J. F., & Globerson, S. (2005). Project management: Processes, methodologies, and  
economics (3rd ed.). Pearson.
Stefik, M., Foster, G., Bobrow, D. G., Kahn, K., Lanning, S., & Suchman, L. (1987). Beyond the  
chalkboard: Computer support for collaboration and problem solving in meetings. Communications 
of the ACM, 30(1), 32–47.
Vigder, M. R., Gentleman, W. M., & Dean, J. C. (1996, January). COTS software integration: State of  
the art (NRC-CNRC Report). National Research Council.
Walsh, B. (1998). Your network’s not ready for e-commerce. Network Computing, 9(22), 25–26.
Yang, H., & M. Tate. (2012). A descriptive literature review and classification of cloud computing 
research. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 31(2). http://aisel.aisnet.org 
/cais/vol31/iss1/2.


===== BOOK PAGE 106 =====

This page intentionally left blank


===== BOOK PAGE 107 =====

C. Covert Darbyshire/The New Yorker Collection/The Cartoon Bank
Information Requirements 
Analysis
PART  
II


===== BOOK PAGE 108 =====

108
4 
Information Gathering: 
Interactive Methods
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Once you have mastered the material in this chapter, you will be able to:
1 Learn the art of interviewing by constructing meaningful questions and conducting  
the interview.
2 Understand the purpose of listening to user stories and why they are useful in systems 
analysis.
3 Grasp the concept of joint application design (JAD) and when to use it.
4 Design and administer effective questionnaires.
5 Learn different ways to prioritize requirements.
You can use four key interactive methods to elicit human information requirements from 
organization members. These four methods are interviewing and eliciting stories, using joint 
application design, surveying people through questionnaires, and using methods to prioritize 
requirements. Although different in their implementation, these methods also have a great 
deal in common. The basis of their shared properties is talking with and listening to people 
who can tell stories about their interactions with technology.
Each of the four interactive methods for information gathering possesses its own 
established process for you to follow in interacting with users. If followed, these sys-
tematic approaches will help ensure proper design and implementation of interviews, 
workshops on joint application design, and questionnaires, as well as support insightful 
analysis of the resulting data. Analysts can choose which of the six methods for require-
ments prioritization is most helpful in getting uers to to prioritize which features are most 
important. Unobtrusive methods such as sampling, investigation, and observing a decision 
maker’s behavior and physical environment do not require the same degree of interactivity 
between analysts and users. These methods are covered in an upcoming chapter. By using 
interactive methods with unobtrusive methods, you will achieve a more complete portrait 
of the organization’s information requirements.
CHAPTER

