
===== BOOK PAGE 109 =====

CHAPTER 4  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : InTERACTIvE  METHods     109
INTERVIEWING
Before you interview someone, you must, in effect, interview yourself. You need to know 
your biases and how they will affect your perceptions. Although robust research is underway 
(Greenwald & Lai, 2020; Mason, 2020) to understand implicit biases and how they affect social 
interaction, no research-based remedies for tasks such as interviewing have been established. 
(Rather, the emphasis has shifted to eliminating discretion in such things as personnel decision 
making). However, suffice it to say that your education, intellect, upbringing, emotions, and 
ethical framework all serve as powerful filters for what you will be hearing in your interviews.
Thoroughly think through an interview before you go. Visualize why you are going, what 
you will ask, and what will make it a successful interview in your eyes. You must anticipate how 
to make the interview fulfilling for the individual you interview as well.
An information-gathering interview is a directed conversation with a specific purpose that 
uses a question-and-answer format. In the interview, you want to get the opinions of the inter -
viewee and their feelings about the current state of the system, organizational and personal goals, 
and informal procedures for interacting with information technologies.
Above all, seek the opinions of the person you are interviewing. Opinions may be more 
important and more revealing than facts. For example, imagine asking the owner of a traditional 
store that has recently added an online store how many customer refunds are typically given for 
web transactions each week. The owner replies, “About 20 to 25 a week.” When you monitor 
the transactions and discover that the average is only 10.5 per week, you might conclude that the 
owner is overstating the facts and the problem.
Imagine instead that you ask the owner what the major concerns are and the owner replies, 
“In my opinion, customer returns of goods purchased over the web are way too high.” By seeking 
opinions rather than facts, you discover a key problem that the owner wants addressed.
In addition to opinions, you should try to capture the feelings of the interviewee. Remember 
that the interviewee knows the organization better than you do. You can understand the organiza-
tion’s culture more fully by listening to the feelings of the responder.
Goals are important information that can be gleaned from interviews. Facts that you obtain 
from hard data may explain past performance, but goals project the organization’s future. Try to 
find out as many of the organization’s goals as possible from interviewing. You may not be able 
to determine goals through any other data-gathering methods.
interacting with other organizational members. You can clarify what 
you have said in your interactions, reflect on how a teammate has 
responded, ask whether they are open to receiving advice from you 
(infrequently), and use probing questions to investigate whether 
you are understanding what your teammate has said. After you view 
the video, please reflect on the following questions:
1. There are some phases that the video suggests enacting to 
improve interaction with a coworker. What is the difference 
between the clarifying and reflecting phases?
2. Some of the advice in the video is to “avoid the urge to 
give advice.” Why is this important in a relationship with a 
teammate?
3. Write a standard question to ask a team member before you 
offer advice.
4. If your teammates and coworkers feel as if they are listened 
to, how does that enable you to respond thoughtfully to what 
they are saying?
SYSTEMS SCENARIO  
Interacting Thoughtfully
This chapter introduces interactive methods the analyst can use for 
gathering information from users and teammates. In this video, the 
topic of responding thoughtfully to coworkers and team members is 
explored in a humorous way. As implied in the video, as a systems 
analyst you need to be responsive and be a good listener when 
To view the video for this scenario,  
see eText Chapter 4.
Seven Dimensions/Boclips


===== BOOK PAGE 110 =====

110    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
The interview is also a valuable opportunity to explore key human–computer interaction 
(HCI) concerns, including ergonomic aspects, system usability, how pleasing and enjoyable the 
system is, and how useful it is in supporting individual tasks.
In the interview, you are setting up a relationship with someone who is probably a stranger to 
you. You need to build trust and understanding quickly, but at the same time, you must maintain 
control of the interview. You also need to sell the system by providing needed information to 
your interviewee. Do so by planning for the interview before you go so that conducting it is 
second nature to you. Later in the chapter, we discuss joint application design (JAD) (pro-
nounced “jad,” rhymes with add), which can serve as an alternative to one-on-one interviewing 
in certain situations.
Five Steps in Interview Preparation
The five major steps in interview preparation are shown in Figure 4.1. These steps include a range 
of activities, from gathering basic background material to deciding who to interview.
Reading Background Material. It’s important to read and understand as much background infor-
mation about the interviewees and their organization as possible. This material often can be 
obtained on the corporate website, from a current annual report, a corporate newsletter, or any 
publications sent out to explain the organization to the public. Check the internet for any corporate 
information, such as information from Standard & Poor’s.
As you read through this material, be particularly sensitive to the language organization 
members use in describing themselves and their organization. What you are trying to do is build 
up a common vocabulary that will eventually enable you to phrase interview questions in a way 
that is understandable to your interviewee. Another benefit of researching your organization is to 
optimize the time you spend in interviews; without such preparation, you may waste time asking 
general background questions.
Establishing Interviewing Objectives. Use the background information you gathered as well as 
your own experience to establish interview objectives. There should be four to six key areas con-
cerning HCI, information processing, and decision-making behavior about which you will want 
to ask questions. These areas include HCI concerns (the usefulness and usability of the system; 
how it fits physical aspects; how it suits a user’s cognitive capabilities; whether it is engaging 
or aesthetically pleasing; and whether using the system is rewarded with desired consequences), 
information sources, information formats, decision-making frequency, qualities of information, 
and decision-making style.
Deciding Whom to Interview. When deciding whom to interview, include key people at all levels 
who will be affected by the system in some manner. Strive for a balance that addresses as many 
users’ needs as possible. Your organization contact will also have some ideas about who should 
be interviewed.
Preparing the Interviewee. Prepare the person to be interviewed by calling ahead or sending an 
email message and allowing the interviewee time to think about the interview. If you are doing 
an in-depth interview, it is permissible to email your questions ahead of time to allow the inter -
viewee time to think over their responses. Because there are many objectives to fulfill in the 
interview (including building trust and observing the workplace), interviews should typically be 
conducted in person and not via email.
With the advent of the Covid-19 pandemic along with prohibitions against meeting in person, 
many interviews are now conducted via Zoom, Google Meet, Microsoft Teams, or other popular 
FIGURE 4.1
Steps a systems analyst follows in 
planning an interview. 1.    Read background material.
2.    Establish interviewing objectives.
3.    Decide whom to interview.
4.    Prepare the interviewee.
5.    Decide on question types and structure.
Steps in Planning the Interview


===== BOOK PAGE 111 =====

CHAPTER 4  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : InTERACTIvE  METHods     111
free and paid video-calling and video-conferencing options. Research suggests that overusing 
video conferencing can lead to exhaustion in unexpected ways; a scale has been developed to 
measure Zoom fatigue called the Zoom Exhaustion and Fatigue scale (Fauville et al., 2021). 
In-person and online interviews should therefore be kept to 45 minutes or an hour at most. No 
matter how much your interviewees seem to want to extend the interview beyond this limit, 
remember that when they spend time with you, they are not doing their other work. If interviews 
go over an hour, it is likely that the interviewees will resent the intrusion, whether or not they 
articulate their resentment.
Deciding on Question Types and Structure. Write questions to cover the key areas of HCI and 
decision making that you discovered when you ascertained interview objectives. Proper question-
ing techniques are the heart of interviewing. Questions have some basic forms you need to know. 
The two basic question types are open-ended and closed. Each question type can accomplish 
something a little different from the other, and each has benefits and drawbacks. You need to think 
about the effect each question type will have.
It is possible to structure your interview in three different patterns: a pyramid structure, a 
funnel structure, or a diamond structure. Each is appropriate under different conditions and serves 
a different function, and each one is discussed later in this chapter.
Question Types
You will use three main question types when you construct your interview: open-ended questions, 
closed questions, and probes. Each question type is useful in different situations and at specific 
times during the interview. In addition, each type of question elicits different information from 
the person you are interviewing.
Open-Ended Questions. Open-ended questions include those such as “What do you think about 
putting all the managers on an intranet?” “Please explain how you make a scheduling decision,” 
and “In what ways does the system extend your capability to do tasks that would not be possible 
otherwise?” Consider the term open-ended. “Open” actually describes the interviewee’s options 
for responding. They are open. The response can be two words or two paragraphs. Some examples 
of open-ended questions are found in Figure 4.2.
The benefits of using open-ended questions are numerous and include the following:
1. Putting the interviewee at ease
2. Allowing the interviewer to pick up on the interviewee’s vocabulary, which reflects their 
education, values, attitudes, and beliefs
3. Providing richness of detail
4. Revealing avenues of further questioning that otherwise may go untapped
5. Making the interview more interesting for the interviewee
6. Allowing more spontaneity
7. Making phrasing easier for the interviewer
8. Using them in a pinch if the interviewer is caught unprepared
As you can see, there are several advantages to using open-ended questions. There are, 
however, also many drawbacks:
1. Asking questions that may result in too much irrelevant detail
2. Possibly losing control of the interview
FIGURE 4.2
Open-ended interview questions 
allow the respondent open options 
for responding. These examples 
were selected from different 
interviews and are not shown in 
any particular order.
Open-Ended Interview Questions
• What’s your opinion of the current state of business-to-business
 ecommerce in your ﬁrm?
• What are the critical objectives of your department?
• Once the data are submitted via the website, how are they processed?
• Describe the monitoring process that is available online.
• What are some of the common data entry errors made in this department?
• What are the biggest frustrations you’ve experienced during the transition
 to ecommerce?


===== BOOK PAGE 112 =====

112    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
3. Allowing responses that may take too much time for the amount of useful information 
gained
4. Potentially seeming that the interviewer is unprepared
5. Possibly giving the impression that the interviewer is on a “fishing expedition,” with no 
real objective for the interview
You must carefully consider the implications of using open-ended questions for interviewing.
Closed Questions. The alternative to open-ended questions is found in the other basic question 
type: closed questions. Such questions are of the basic form “Is it easy to use the current system?” 
and “How many subordinates do you have?” The possible responses are closed to the interviewee 
because they can only reply with a finite number, such as “None,” “One,” or “Fifteen.” Some 
examples of closed questions can be found in Figure 4.3.
A closed question limits the responses available to the interviewee. You may be familiar with 
closed questions through multiple-choice exams in college. You are given a question and five 
responses, but you are not allowed to write down your own response and get credit for correctly 
answering the question.
A special kind of closed question is the dichotomous closed question. This type of question 
limits the interviewee even further by allowing only a choice on either pole, such as yes or no, 
true or false, or agree or disagree. Examples of dichotomous questions can be found in Figure 4.4.
The benefits of using closed questions of either type include the following:
1. Saving time
2. Easily comparing interviews
3. Getting to the point
4. Keeping control over the interview
5. Covering lots of ground quickly
6. Getting to relevant data
The drawbacks of using closed questions are substantial, however. They include the following:
1. Boring for the interviewee
2. Failing to obtain rich detail (because the interviewer supplies the frame of reference for the 
interviewee)
3. Failing to address the main ideas for the preceding reason
4. Failing to build rapport between interviewer and interviewee
Thus, as an interviewer, you must think carefully about the question types you will use.
FIGURE 4.3
Closed interview questions limit 
the respondent’s options. These 
examples were selected from 
different interviews and are not 
shown in any particular order.
Closed Interview Questions
•  How many times a week is the project repository updated?
•  On average, how many calls does the call center receive monthly?
•  Which of the following sources of information is most valuable to you?
        8  Completed customer complaint forms
        8  Email complaints from consumers who visit the website
        8  Face-to-face interaction with customers
        8  Returned merchandise
•  List your top two priorities for improving the technology infrastructure.
•  Who receives this input?
FIGURE 4.4
Dichotomous interview questions 
are a special kind of closed 
question. These examples were 
selected from different interviews 
and are not shown in any 
particular order.
Dichotomous Interview Questions
•  Do you use the Web to provide information to vendors?
•  Do you agree or disagree that ecommerce on the Web lacks security?
•  Do you want to receive a printout of your account status every month?
•  Does your website maintain a FAQ page for employees with payroll
 questions?
•  Is this form complete?


===== BOOK PAGE 113 =====

CHAPTER 4  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : InTERACTIvE  METHods     113
Both open-ended and closed questions have advantages and drawbacks, as shown in 
Figure 4.5. Notice that choosing one question type over the other involves a trade-off; although 
an open-ended question affords breadth and depth of reply, responses to open-ended questions 
are difficult to analyze.
Probes. A third type of question is the probe, or follow-up. The strongest probe is the simplest—
the question “Why?” Other probes are “Please provide an example of a time you did not find the 
system trustworthy” and “Please elaborate on that for me.” Some examples of probing questions 
can be found in Figure 4.6. The purpose of a probe is to go beyond the initial answer to get more 
meaning, to clarify, and to draw out and expand on the interviewee’s point. Probes may be either 
open-ended or closed questions.
It is essential to probe. Most beginning interviewers are reticent about probing and conse-
quently accept superficial answers. They are usually grateful that employees have granted inter-
views and feel somewhat obligated to accept unqualified statements politely.
Arranging Questions in a Logical Sequence
Just as there are two generally recognized ways of reasoning—inductive and deductive—there 
are two similar ways of organizing your interviews. A third way combines both inductive and 
deductive patterns.
Using a Pyramid Structure. Inductive organization of interview questions can be visualized as 
having a pyramid shape. Using this form, the interviewer begins with very detailed, often closed, 
questions. The interviewer then expands the topics by allowing open-ended questions and more 
generalized responses, as shown in Figure 4.7.
FIGURE 4.6
Probes allow a systems analyst 
to follow up on questions to get 
more detailed responses. These 
examples were selected from 
different interviews and are not 
shown in any particular order.
Probes
•
•
•
•
•
•
Why?
Give an example of how ecommerce has been integrated into your
business processes.
Please give an illustration of the security problems you are experiencing
with your online bill payment system.
You mentioned both an intranet and an extranet solution. Please give an
example of how you think each differs.
What makes you feel that way?
Tell me step by step what happens after a customer clicks the “Submit”
button on the Web registration form.
FIGURE 4.5
Attributes of open-ended and 
closed questions.
ClosedOpen-Ended
Low
Low
Low
Much
Much
Diﬃcult
High
High
High
Little
Little
EasyEase of Analysis
Reliability of Data
Eﬃcient Use of Ti me 
Precision of Data
Breadth and Depth
Interviewer Skill Required


===== BOOK PAGE 114 =====

114    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
You should use a pyramid structure if you believe your interviewee needs to warm up to the 
topic. Using a pyramid structure for question sequencing is also useful when you want an ending 
determination about the topic. Such is the case in the final question in Figure 4.7, “In general, how 
do you feel about the security of data versus the importance of internet access?”
problems presented by managers, and interacting with club mem-
bers. His time is short, and to compensate for that, he has become 
an extremely well-organized, efficient divisional manager. He 
cannot grant you a lot of interview time. However, his input is 
important, and he feels he would be the main beneficiary of the 
proposed system.
What type of interview question might be most suitable for your 
interview with Gen? Why is this type most appropriate? How will 
your choice of question type affect the amount of time you spend 
in preparation for interviewing Gen? Write 5 to 10 questions of this 
type. What other techniques might you use to supplement informa-
tion unavailable through that type of question? Write a paragraph 
to explain.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 4.1 
Strengthening Your Question Types
Strongbodies, a large local chain of sports clubs, has experienced 
phenomenal growth in the past five years. Management would like 
to refine its decision-making process for purchasing new body-
building equipment by developing a dashboard. Currently, managers 
listen to customers, attend trade shows, look at advertisements, and 
put in requests for new equipment purchases based on their subjec-
tive perceptions. These are then approved or denied by Li Gen.
Gen is the first person you will interview. He is a 37-year-old 
division manager who runs five area clubs. He travels all over the 
city to their widespread locations. He keeps an office at the East 
location, although he is there less than a quarter of the time.
In addition, when Gen is present at a club, he is busy 
answering business-related phone calls, solving on-the-spot 
FIGURE 4.7
The pyramid structure for 
interviewing goes from specific 
 to general questions. What
speciﬁcally is
the problem you
are experiencing
with your ﬁrewall?
Have you considered other methods
to improve the security of
corporate data?
What do you think would make 
security more eﬀective here?
In general, how do you feel about the security of
data versus the importance of internet access?
… and end
with a
general
one.
Pyramid
structures
start with a
speciﬁc question …


===== BOOK PAGE 115 =====

CHAPTER 4  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : InTERACTIvE  METHods     115
Using a Funnel Structure. In this form, the interviewer takes a deductive approach by beginning 
with generalized, open-ended questions and then narrowing the possible responses by using closed 
questions. This interview structure can be thought of as funnel shaped, as depicted in Figure 4.8. 
Using the funnel structure method provides an easy, nonthreatening way to begin an interview. 
A funnel-shaped question sequence is also useful when the interviewee feels emotional about the 
topic and needs freedom to express those emotions.
Using a Diamond-Shaped Structure. Often a combination of the pyramid and funnel structures, 
resulting in a diamond-shaped structure, is best. This structure entails beginning in a very 
specific way, then examining general issues, and finally coming to a very specific conclusion, as 
shown in Figure 4.9.
The interviewer begins with easy, closed questions that provide a warm-up to the interview 
process. In the middle of the interview, the interviewee is asked for opinions on broad topics that 
obviously have no “right” answer. The interviewer then narrows the questions again to get specific 
questions answered, thus providing closure for both the interviewee and the interviewer. The 
diamond structure combines the strengths of the other two approaches but has the disadvantage 
of taking longer to implement than either other structure.
The end of the interview is a natural place to ask one key question: “Is there anything we 
haven’t touched on that you feel is important for me to know?” Considered a formula question 
by the interviewee most of the time, the response will often be “No.” You are interested in the 
other times, when this question opens the proverbial floodgates and much new data are presented.
As you conclude the interview, summarize and provide feedback on your overall impressions. 
Inform the interviewee about the subsequent steps to take and what you and other team members 
will do next. Ask the interviewee with whom you should talk next. Set up future appointment times 
for follow-up interviews, thank the interviewee for their time, and shake hands.
Writing the Interview Report
Although the interview itself is complete, your work on the interview data is just beginning. You 
need to capture the essence of the interview through a written report. It is imperative that you write 
the interview report as soon as possible after the interview. This step is another way you can 
ensure quality of interview data. The longer you wait to write up your interview, the more suspect 
the quality of your data becomes.
After this initial summary, go into more detail, noting main points of the interview and your 
own opinions. Review the interview report with the respondent at a follow-up meeting. This step 
helps clarify the meaning the interviewee had in mind and lets the interviewee know that you are 
interested enough to take the time to understand their point of view and perceptions.
FIGURE 4.8
The funnel structure for 
interviewing begins with broad 
questions and then funnels to 
specific questions.
What items will be available for
purchase on the website?
What are your reactions to the new
Web-based procurement system?
    
Is there any essential
item that has been
excluded from
the site?
What departments are involved in implementing it? 
… and end with
a speciﬁc one.
Funnel structures
begin with a
general question …


===== BOOK PAGE 116 =====

116    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
LISTENING TO STORIES
Stories originate in the workplace, and many are shared with, and repeated by, coworkers. Orga-
nizational stories, like myths and fables, are used to relay some kind of information. This shared 
information is usually considered important enough to build an entire story around it, and when a 
story is told and retold, even handed down over time, the story takes on a mythic quality. Isolated 
stories are welcome when you are looking for facts, and enduring stories capture all aspects of the 
organization. Enduring stories are the ones a systems analyst should be seeking.
Although structured interviews have many advantages, including the ability to ask many peo-
ple the same set of questions, they may not produce the rich detail you need to design your system.
Suppose the developer is faced with the task of analyzing and redesigning a system. The 
developer can learn from experiences the organization encountered in their previous design proj-
ect. It would be helpful to identify people who had lived through that experience. They may have 
valuable insights that will help the developer with the new project.
It is difficult for the developer to generate a list of interview questions because the problems 
encountered, the obstacles cleared, and the learning that took place are unknown to the developer. 
By encouraging stories, however, these experiences may be brought out, maybe not at first, but as 
the story is being told. Patience is a key value for the listener.
The developer may be able to understand the behavior and the values of organization mem-
bers by listening. By listening carefully to organization members, the developer can get a much 
better understanding of the strategic objectives, potential obstacles, decisions, and lessons learned.
It might be apparent that listening to stories is not efficient. It takes considerably more time 
than asking interview questions. However, listening to stories may be more rewarding. Stories are 
more easily remembered than interview responses, so in some ways, that makes up for the fact 
that it takes time to listen.
FIGURE 4.9
The diamond-shaped structure 
for interviewing combines the 
pyramid and funnel structures.
What ﬁve
kinds of information
are tracked by the free
website usage service you use?
What are the promotional activities you
feature on your website in exchange for this service?
What is the value of the usage information to you as a Web developer?
What are two surprising items concerning end user
behavior on your site that you have discovered
by using this service?
Are “cookies” a better
way to measure
end user site
usage?
… and end with a
speciﬁc question.
… move toward
general
questions …
Diamond
structures begin
with a speciﬁc
question …


===== BOOK PAGE 117 =====

CHAPTER 4  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : InTERACTIvE  METHods     117
that information to better control the production of the company’s 
large product line (it includes whole, skim, 2 percent, and 1 percent 
milk, half-and-half, cottage cheese, yogurt, and frozen novelties). 
Sales managers are currently sending their sales figures via the web 
to corporate headquarters, 600 miles away, and even the production 
of online reports seems slow. You will base your ad-libbed questions 
on what you have just found out on the tour.
In the few minutes before your interview begins, decide on a 
structure for it: funnel, pyramid, or diamond. In a paragraph, justify 
why you would proceed with the interview structure you have cho-
sen based on the unusual context of this interview. Write a series 
of questions and organize them in the structure you have chosen.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 4.2 
Skimming the Surface
You are about to leave SureCheck Dairy after a preliminary tour 
when another member of your systems analysis team calls you at 
the dairy to say they cannot make their interview appointment 
with the plant manager because of illness. The plant manager is 
extremely busy, and you want to keep their enthusiasm for the project 
going by doing things as scheduled. You also realize that without the 
initial interview data, the rest of your data gathering will be slowed. 
Although you have no interview questions prepared, you make the 
decision to go ahead and interview the plant manager on the spot.
You have learned that sales managers at SureCheck are all inter-
ested in processing their own data and producing their own reports 
on quantities and kinds of dairy products sold so that they can use 
Stories Are Made Up of Elements
Storytellers often make themselves the hero, or protagonist, of the story. This is not unusual, and 
it is not a drawback. When storytellers put themselves into the center of the story, the struggles 
they encounter are their own battles. They become real to the listener, who can empathize with 
the storytellers.
An example of a story is shown in Figure 4.10. All stories have these elements:
1. The call to adventure
2. The quest
3. The struggle
4. The transformation
5. The resolution
6. The moral
7. The epilogue
A typical story starts with a reason an opportunity was noticed or a problem needed addressing. 
This is the call to adventure, and there is never a simple solution. No one tells a story such as, “It 
was drafty last night, so I got up and shut the window.” That is a statement, not a story. Stories 
have twists and turns, advances and setbacks, learning and decision making.
The quest in a story implies that there is something worth finding or achieving. In explaining 
the quest, the storyteller enumerates the organization’s objectives. It is worthwhile to undergo 
hardship if there is a worthwhile goal.
Next comes the struggle. Listen to hear who the storyteller names as villains. Is it government 
regulation, external competition, or other members of the organization? It helps to understand 
what obstacles may exist now.
If a solution existed, the problem would be solved, and the story would end here, but sim-
ply pushing a metaphorical boulder out of the way does not typically solve problems. Usually, 
something within the organization, or even the protagonist, must change. Problems are solved by 
process or behavior changes rather than by product changes, and this is revealed in this part of the 
story. Storytellers also reveal their own weaknesses. In this revelatory approach, the storyteller 
describes overcoming this weakness, even undergoing a phenomenal transformation. Once the 
hero undergoes the transformation, it becomes possible to solve the problem.
The resolution comes when the storyteller tells whether the quest succeeded. It is possible 
that the storyteller may be telling you how a technology adoption failed, but you are more likely 
to hear a positive story.


===== BOOK PAGE 118 =====

118    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
Usually, a moral is important to the story. The reason for the moral is to tell others how to 
behave and, furthermore, what values they should possess. It is a statement of the lessons learned.
Finally, the story may end with an epilogue. A happy resolution when the problem was first 
solved may be changed with the passage of time. Competition, customer preferences, improved 
hardware, and social, environmental, or legal issues that have occurred since the successful imple-
mentation may be creating new obstacles for the organization. Perhaps that is why the developer 
has been called in to change the system again.
Reasons for Telling Stories
The rich information an analyst gets from listening carefully to the stories is in itself valuable, 
but the analyst shouldn’t stop there. The information gleaned from the stories will make more 
sense and be more valuable if seen in context. Why did the storyteller tell this story? In child-
hood, we are told stories and fables so that we adopt good values. For example, the fables “The 
Grasshopper and the Ant” or “The Hare and the Tortoise” are commonly told in English-speaking 
cultures. The former teaches us the importance of good work habits, and the latter emphasizes 
what happens if we are overconfident. Do business stories have the same purpose?
Business stories are a little more complex. We can break down stories into four important 
main types:
1. Experiential stories
2. Explanatory stories
3. Validating stories
4. Prescriptive stories
FIGURE 4.10
Story elements and  
corresponding examples. 
Quotation from Thomas (2016).
Story element Example from “Open source software opens door to Web design career” by Mark 
Thomas (2016)
The call to 
adventure
“I was fascinated and envious—I wanted to be able to create those exciting images 
with their grungy textures, characters lifted from games, dramatic lighting, and 
emphatic quotes. Other people didn’t seem to find it difficult to finish them, but I 
had no idea where to even start.”
The quest
“I was going to have to learn this discipline properly. Such things are not achieved 
overnight, of course, and so began a long quest to find, practice, and learn from 
every design resource I could find.”
The struggle
“Researching the topic, I realized that I had used the wrong tool for the job. Exas-
perated and in no small way desperate, I began looking for a package I could turn 
to, to rescue the situation. Time was pressing and, even if I could find an answer 
in time, as the now self-proclaimed designer in the team I would have to learn it 
double-quick.”
The 
transformation
“Taking stock for a moment, I began to wonder if it was possible to begin a business 
operation based on the open source software I was now developing in confidence 
and ability with. It became an ambition.”
The resolution
“In 2009, I designed and built a website for the bakery that went on to supply our 
wedding cake, saving us money and introducing new customers to their business, 
too. In 2010, I created all the artwork for our wedding stationery. Later the same 
year, I registered my UK company and began providing Web design services to local 
companies who needed designs for their websites, which I then started to code.”
The moral
“To me, open source software means opportunity. It means education, freedom, 
commitment, collaboration and challenges. I went from knowing nothing whatsoever 
about design and coding to starting my own Web design business and capturing local 
clients who were happy with the things I’ve made for them and unconcerned by the 
tools I’d used to do it.”
The epilogue
“And even though my day job prevents me from publishing anywhere near the 
number of blog articles I want to (for which I apologize to my readers—you are not 
forgotten), it still manages nearly 3,000 visitors a month, and I regularly receive 
requests for tutorials from around the world, which I will get around to at some 
point.”


===== BOOK PAGE 119 =====

CHAPTER 4  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : InTERACTIvE  METHods     119
Experiential stories describe what life is like in the organization. Explanatory stories go a 
little further, suggesting that there is an explanation for behavior or a reason for the decisions 
made within the organization. Validating stories are used to convince people that the organiza-
tion made the correct decision, or they are used to express and maintain the existing values of 
the organization. Prescriptive stories are the organizational equivalent of childhood fables. These 
stories suggest how everyone in the organization should behave. It is helpful for the developer to 
know why a storyteller is telling their story.
Systems analysts can use storytelling as a complement to other information-gathering meth-
ods such as interviewing, JAD, and surveys. You need to engage organization participants by 
reacting to stories, matching one story to another by recounting it to other participants, and even 
collaborating with the participant to reframe and understand organization stories. It is a good way 
to deeply understand some of the problems associated with information systems use, systems 
development, systems adoption, and designing for your intended audience.
We have observed that many of the stories systems analysts have reported on in the past have 
been mere fragments of stories. The intent or purpose of the story is not understood, and therefore 
the analyst is not able to fully understand the importance of the story. The systems analyst needs 
to listen to the story as a whole to truly understand its content and purpose.
JOINT APPLICATION DESIGN
No matter how adept you become as an interviewer, you will inevitably experience situations 
in which one-on-one interviews do not seem to be as useful as you would like. Personal inter -
views are time-consuming and subject to error, and their data are prone to misinterpretation. IBM 
developed an alternative approach to interviewing users one by one, called joint application 
design (JAD). The motivations for using JAD are to cut the time (and hence the cost) required 
for personal interviews, to improve the quality of the results of information requirements assess-
ment, and to create more user identification with new information systems as a result of the 
participative processes.
Although JAD can be substituted for personal interviews at any appropriate juncture during 
the systems development life cycle, it has usually been employed as a technique that allows you, 
as a systems analyst, to accomplish requirements analysis and to design the user interface jointly 
with users in a group setting. The many intricacies of this approach can be learned only in a com-
merical seminar demonstrating proprietary methods. We can, however, convey enough information 
about JAD here to make you aware of some of its benefits and drawbacks in comparison with 
one-on-one interviews.
Conditions That Support the Use of JAD
The following list of conditions will help you decide when the use of JAD may be fruitful. 
Consider using joint application design when:
1. User groups are restless and want something new, not a standard solution to a typical 
problem.
2. The organization culture supports joint problem-solving behaviors among multiple levels 
of employees.
3. Analysts forecast that the number of ideas generated via one-on-one interviews will not be 
as plentiful as the number of ideas possible from an extended group exercise.
4. Organization workflow permits the absence of key personnel during a two- to four-day 
block of time.
Who Is Involved?
Joint application design sessions include a variety of participants—analysts, users, executives, and 
so on—who contribute different backgrounds and skills to the sessions. Your primary concern here 
is that all project team members are committed to the JAD approach and become involved. Choose 
an executive sponsor, a senior person who will introduce and conclude the JAD session. Prefer -
ably, select an executive from the user group who has some sort of authority over the information 
systems (IS) people working on the project. This person will be an important, visible symbol of 
organizational commitment to the systems project.


===== BOOK PAGE 120 =====

120    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
At least one IS analyst should be present, but the analyst usually takes a passive role, unlike 
traditional interviewing in which the analyst controls the interaction. As the project analyst, you 
should be present during JAD to listen to what users say and what they require. In addition, 
you will want to give an expert opinion about any disproportionate costs of solutions proposed 
during the JAD session itself. Without this kind of immediate feedback, unrealistic solutions with 
excessive costs may creep into the proposal and prove costly to discourage later on.
From eight to a dozen users, of any rank, can be chosen to participate in JAD sessions. Try to 
select users who can articulate what information they need to perform their jobs as well as what 
they desire in a new or improved computer system.
The session leader should not be an expert in systems analysis and design but, rather, someone 
who has excellent communication skills to facilitate appropriate interactions. Note that you do not 
want to use a session leader who reports to another person in the group. To avoid this possibility, 
an organization may want to retain an outside management consultant to serve as session leader. 
The point is to get a person who can bring the group’s attention to important systems issues, 
satisfactorily negotiate and resolve conflicts, and help group members reach a consensus.
Your JAD session should also include one or two observers who are analysts or technical 
experts from other functional areas to offer technical explanations and advice to the group during 
the sessions. In addition, one scribe from the IS department should attend the JAD sessions to 
formally write down everything that is done.
Where to Hold JAD Meetings
If at all possible, we recommend holding the two- to four-day sessions off-site, away from the 
organization, in comfortable surroundings. Some groups use executive centers or even group 
decision support facilities that are available at major universities. The idea is to minimize the 
daily distractions and responsibilities of the participants’ regular work. Good video call options 
to replace in-person JAD sessions (during a pandemic, for example) have not been researched. 
Therefore, consider that the timing should be such that all participants can meet face to face. The 
room itself should comfortably hold the number of people invited. Minimal presentation support 
equipment includes two projectors to connect to two laptops, iPads, or PCs; a whiteboard; a flip 
chart; and easy access to a copier. Group decision support rooms also provide networked PCs, a 
projection system, and software written to facilitate group interaction while minimizing unpro-
ductive group behaviors.
Schedule your JAD session when all participants can commit to attending. Do not hold the 
sessions unless everyone who has been invited can actually attend. This rule is critical to the suc-
cess of the sessions. Ensure that every participant receives an agenda before the meeting and 
consider holding an orientation meeting for a half day one week or so before the workshop so that 
those involved know what is expected of them. Such a premeeting allows you to move rapidly and 
act confidently once the actual meeting is convened.
Accomplishing a Structured Analysis of Project Activities
IBM recommends that the JAD sessions examine these points in the proposed systems project: 
planning, receiving, receipt processing/tracking, monitoring, assigning, recording, sending, and  
evaluating. For each topic, the questions who, what, how, where, and why should be asked 
and answered as well. Clearly, ad hoc interactive systems such as recommender systems and 
other types of systems dependent on decision-maker style (including prototype systems) are not 
as easily analyzed with the structured approach of JAD.
As the analyst involved with the JAD sessions, you should receive the notes of the scribe and 
prepare a specifications document based on what happened at the meeting. Systematically present 
the management objectives as well as the scope and boundaries of the project. Specifics of the 
system, including details on screen and report layouts, should also be included.
Potential Benefits of Using JAD in Place of Traditional Interviewing
There are four major potential benefits that you, the users, and your systems analysis team should 
consider when you weigh the possibilities of using JAD. The first potential benefit is time savings 
over traditional one-on-one interviews. Some organizations have estimated that JAD sessions have 
provided a 15 percent time savings over the traditional approach.


===== BOOK PAGE 121 =====

CHAPTER 4  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : InTERACTIvE  METHods     121
Hand in hand with time savings is the rapid development possible via JAD. Because user 
interviews are not accomplished serially over a period of weeks or months, the development can 
proceed much more quickly.
A third benefit to weigh is the possibility of improved ownership of the information system. 
Analysts are always striving to involve users in meaningful ways and to encourage users to take 
early ownership of the systems being designed. Due to its interactive nature and high visibility, 
JAD helps users become involved early in systems projects and treats their feedback seriously. 
Working through a JAD session eventually helps reflect user ideas in the final design.
A final benefit of participating in JAD sessions is the creative development of designs. The 
interactive character of JAD has a great deal in common with brainstorming techniques that gener-
ate new ideas and new combinations of ideas because of the dynamic and stimulating environment. 
Designs evolve through facilitated interactions rather than in relative isolation.
Potential Drawbacks of Using JAD
There are three drawbacks or pitfalls that you should weigh when making a decision on whether 
to do traditional one-on-one interviews or use JAD. The first drawback is that JAD requires the 
commitment of a large block of time from all participants. Because JAD requires a two- to four-
day commitment, it is not possible to do any other activities concurrently or to time-shift any 
activities, as is typically done in one-on-one interviewing.
A second pitfall occurs if preparation for the JAD sessions is inadequate in any regard or if the 
follow-up report and documentation of specifications is incomplete. In these instances, resulting 
designs could be less than satisfactory. Many variables need to come together correctly for JAD 
to be successful. Conversely, many things can go wrong. The success of designs resulting from 
JAD sessions is less predictable than that achieved through standard interviews.
Finally, the necessary organizational skills and organization culture may not be sufficiently 
developed to enable the concerted effort required to be productive in a JAD setting. In the end you 
will have to judge whether the organization is truly committed to, and prepared for, this approach.
USING QUESTIONNAIRES
The use of questionnaires is an information-gathering technique that allows systems analysts 
to study attitudes, beliefs, behavior, and characteristics of several key people in the organization 
who may be affected by the current and proposed systems. Attitudes are what people in the 
organization say they want (in a new system, for instance); beliefs are what people think is actu-
ally true; behavior is what organization members do, and characteristics are properties of people 
or things.
team who worked here a dozen years ago. I still keep them because 
you never know when you’ll need them as a guide. It’s definitely 
survival of the fittest around here.”
Identify the overriding metaphor Zhenya is using to describe 
the reports she is receiving and the accessibility of information in 
them. In a paragraph, describe how this step helps you understand 
Zhenya’s attitude toward any work proposed by your systems analy-
sis team. In a paragraph, adopt Zhenya’s metaphor and extend it in 
a more positive sense during your interview with her by writing six 
interview questions based on her metaphor.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 4.3 
A Systems Analyst, I Presume?
“Know what I think of the work the last systems analyst team 
did? The proliferation of PDF reports created a jungle on my desk-
top. To figure out the cost of raw materials to us, I have to cut my way 
through the overgrowth of data, hacking my path with drill-down 
capabilities that I have had to create for myself. I delete everything 
that’s irrelevant. Sometimes I rip out the excess vegetation until  
I see the numbers I need on my screen,” says Zhenya Sui, account-
ing supervisor for Zenith Glass Company. As you interview her, 
she points unhappily to an untidy stack of old printouts sprouting 
beside her desk. “Those were output from the work of a systems


===== BOOK PAGE 122 =====

122    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
Responses gained through questionnaires (also called surveys) using closed questions can 
be quantified. If you are surveying people via email or the web, you can use software to turn 
electronic responses directly into data tables for analysis using a spreadsheet application or sta-
tistical software package. Responses to questionnaires using open-ended questions are analyzed 
and interpreted in other ways. Answers to questions on attitudes and beliefs are sensitive to the 
wording chosen by the systems analyst.
Using questionnaires, the analyst may be seeking to quantify what was found in interviews. 
In addition, questionnaires may be used to determine how widespread or limited a sentiment 
expressed in an interview really is. Conversely, questionnaires can be used to survey a large sample 
of system users to sense problems or raise important issues before interviews are scheduled.
Throughout this chapter, we compare and contrast questionnaires with interviews. There 
are many similarities between the two techniques, and perhaps the ideal would be to use them in 
conjunction with each other, either following up unclear questionnaire responses with an inter -
view or designing the questionnaire based on what is discovered in the interview. Each technique, 
however, has its own specific functions, and it is not always necessary or desirable to use both.
Planning for the Use of Questionnaires
At first glance, using questionnaires may seem to be a quick way to gather massive amounts of 
data about how users assess the current system, about what problems they are experiencing with 
their work, and about what people expect from a new or modified system. Although it is true that 
you can gather a lot of information through questionnaires without spending time in face-to-face 
interviews, developing a useful questionnaire takes extensive planning time in its own right. When 
you decide to survey users via email or the web, you face additional planning considerations con-
cerning confidentiality, authentication of identity, and problems of multiple responses.
You must first decide what you are attempting to gain through using a survey. For instance, if 
you want to know what percentage of users prefers a frequently asked questions page as a means 
of learning about new software packages, a questionnaire might be the right technique. If you 
want an in-depth analysis of a manager’s decision-making process, conducting an interview is a 
better choice.
Here are some guidelines to help you decide whether the use of questionnaires is appropriate. 
Consider using questionnaires if:
1. The people you need to question are widely dispersed (as in different branches of the same 
corporation)
2. Many people are involved in the systems project, and it is meaningful to know what 
proportion of a given group (for example, management) approves or disapproves of a 
particular feature of the proposed system
3. You are doing an exploratory study and want to gauge overall opinion before the systems 
project is given any specific direction
4. You wish to be certain that any problems with the current system are identified and 
addressed in follow-up interviews
Once you have determined that you have good cause to use a questionnaire and have 
pinpointed the objectives to be fulfilled through its use, you can begin formulating questions.
Writing Questions
The biggest difference between the questions used for most interviews and those used on question-
naires is that interviewing permits interaction between the questions and their meanings. In an 
interview, the analyst has an opportunity to refine a question, define an unclear term, change the 
course of questioning, respond to a puzzled look from the interviewee, and generally control 
the context.
Few of these opportunities are possible on a questionnaire. Thus, for an analyst, questions 
must be transparently clear, the flow of the questionnaire cogent, the respondent’s questions antici-
pated, and the administration of the questionnaire planned in detail. (A respondent is a person who 
responds to or answers the questionnaire.)
The basic question types used on the questionnaire are open-ended and closed, as discussed 
for interviewing. Due to the constraints placed on questionnaires, some additional discussion of 
question types is warranted.


===== BOOK PAGE 123 =====

CHAPTER 4  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : InTERACTIvE  METHods     123
Open-Ended Questions. Recall that open-ended questions (or statements) are those that leave 
all possible response options open to the respondent. For example, open-ended questions on a 
questionnaire might read, “Describe any problems you are currently experiencing with output 
reports” or “In your opinion, how helpful are the online user manuals for the current system’s 
accounting application?”
When you write open-ended questions for a questionnaire, anticipate what kind of response 
you will get. For instance, if you ask a question such as, “How do you feel about the system?” the 
responses are apt to be too broad for accurate interpretation or comparison. Therefore, even when 
you write an open-ended question, it must be narrow enough to guide respondents to answer in a 
specific way. (Examples of open-ended questions can be found in Figure 4.11.)
Open-ended questions are particularly well suited to situations in which you want to get at 
organization members’ opinions about some aspect of the system, whether product or process. In 
such cases, you will want to use open-ended questions when it is impossible to list effectively all 
the possible responses to the question.
FIGURE 4.11
Open-ended questions used for 
questionnaires.
53. What are the most frequent problems you
experience with computer output?
A.
B.
C.
54. Of the problems you listed above, what is the single
most troublesome?
55. Why?
Below are questions about yourself. Please ﬁll in the
blanks to the best of your ability.
67. How long have you worked for this company? 
Years and Months
68. How long have you worked in the same industry? 
Years and Months
69. In what other industries have you worked? 
Open-ended
questions can
ask the
respondent
for lists …
… or detailed
responses …
… or short
answers.


===== BOOK PAGE 124 =====

124    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
Closed Questions. Recall that closed questions (or statements) limit or close the response options 
available to the respondent. For example, in Figure 4.12, the statement in question 23 (“Below are 
the six software packages currently available. Please check the software package(s) you person-
ally use most frequently.”) is closed. Notice that respondents are not asked why the package is 
preferred, nor are they asked to select more than one, even if that is a more representative response.
A systems analyst should use closed questions when it is possible to effectively list all the 
possible responses to the question and when all the listed responses are mutually exclusive so that 
choosing one precludes choosing any of the others.
Use closed questions when you want to survey a large sample of people. The reason becomes 
obvious when you start imagining how the data you are collecting will look. If you use only open-
ended questions for hundreds of people, correct analysis and interpretation of their responses 
becomes impossible without the aid of a computerized content analysis program or some type of 
text analytics software.
FIGURE 4.12
Closed questions on 
questionnaires help ensure 
responses.
 Answer questions 23 and 24 by checking the appropriate box.
23. Below are the six software packages currently
available. Please check the software package(s)
you personally use most frequently.
[ ] Microsoft Excel [ ] Microsoft Access
[ ] Microsoft PowerPoint [ ] Microsoft Project
[ ] Oracle SCM [ ] Visible Analyst
24. “The sales ﬁgures are usually late. ”
[ ] Agree [ ] Disagree
Answer questions 25 and 26 by circling the appropriate number.
25. “When the sales ﬁgures are prepared by computer data
services they are late.”
Never Rarely Sometimes Often Always
1 2 3 4 5
High School
Marketing
Operations
Investments
The division I am currently in is called
Answer questions 45–48 by circling the appropriate response. 
Closed questions
may require the
respondent to
check a box …
… or circle a
number …
… or circle the
answer itself.
Some College 
46.
45.
My educational background can best be described as 
Master’s Degree or Higher
Bachelor’s Degree


===== BOOK PAGE 125 =====

CHAPTER 4  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : InTERACTIvE  METHods     125
There are trade-offs involved in choosing either open-ended or closed questions for use on 
questionnaires. Figure 4.13 summarizes these trade-offs. Notice that responses to open-ended 
questions can help analysts gain rich, exploratory insights as well as breadth and depth on a topic. 
Although open-ended questions can be written easily, analyzing responses to them is difficult and 
time-consuming.
When we refer to the writing of closed questions with either ordered or unordered answers, 
we often refer to the process as scaling. The use of scales in surveys is discussed in detail in a 
later section.
Word Choice. Just as with interviews, the language of questionnaires is an extremely important 
aspect of their effectiveness. Even if a systems analyst has a standard set of questions concerning 
systems development, it is wise to write them to reflect the business’s own terminology.
Respondents appreciate the efforts of someone who bothers to write a questionnaire reflecting 
their own language usage. For instance, if the business uses the term supervisors instead of 
managers or units rather than departments, incorporating the preferred terms into the question-
naire helps respondents relate to the meaning of the questions. Responses will be easier to interpret 
accurately, and respondents will be more enthusiastic overall.
To check whether language used on the questionnaire is that of the respondents, try some 
sample questions on a pilot (test) group. Ask them to pay particular attention to the appropriate-
ness of the wording and to change any words that do not ring true.
Here are some guidelines to use when choosing language for your questionnaire:
1. Use the language of respondents whenever possible. Keep wording simple.
2. Be specific rather than vague in your wording. Avoid overly specific questions as well.
3. Keep questions short.
4. Do not patronize respondents by talking down to them through low-level language  
choices.
5. Avoid bias in wording. Avoiding bias includes avoiding objectionable questions. You can 
have a team member review your language just to make sure biases aren’t creeping in.
6. Target questions to the correct respondents (that is, those who can respond). Don’t assume 
too much knowledge.
7. Ensure that questions are technically accurate before including them.
8. Use software to check whether the reading level is appropriate for the respondents.
Using Scales in Questionnaires. Scaling is the process of assigning numbers or other symbols to 
an attribute or a characteristic for the purpose of measuring that attribute or characteristic. Scales 
are often arbitrary and may not be unique. For example, temperature is measured in a number 
of ways; the two most common are the Fahrenheit scale (where water freezes at 32 degrees and 
boils at 212 degrees) and the Celsius scale (where freezing occurs at 0 degrees and boiling at 
100 degrees).
FIGURE 4.13
Trade-offs between the use of 
open-ended and closed questions 
on questionnaires.
Open-Ended Closed
Slow Fast
High Low
High Low
Easy Diﬃcult
Diﬃcult Easy
Speed of Completion
Exploratory Nature
Breadth and Depth
Ease of Preparation
Ease of Analysis


===== BOOK PAGE 126 =====

126    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
“Rich Kleintz,” By and Sal call out in unison.
“Well, as you can see, it’s not telling us anything!” Penny 
exclaims.
Penny and her staff are dissatisfied with the responses they have 
received on the unbearable questionnaire, and they feel that the 
responses are unrealistic reflections of the amount of information 
account executives want. In a paragraph, state why these problems 
are occurring. On a separate sheet, change the scaling of the ques-
tions to avoid these problems.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 4.4 
The Unbearable Questionnaire
“I’m going to go into a depression or at least a slump if someone 
doesn’t figure this out soon,” says Penny Stox, office manager for 
Carbon, Carbon, & Rippy, a large brokerage firm. Penny is sitting 
across a conference table from you and two of her most produc-
tive account executives, By Lowe and Sal Hy. You are all mulling 
over the responses to a questionnaire that has been distributed among 
the firm’s account executives, which is shown in Figure 4.C1.
“We need a crystal ball to understand these,” By and Sal call 
out together.
“Maybe it reflects some sort of optimistic cycle or something,” 
Penny says as she reads more of the responses. “Who designed this 
gem, anyway?”
FIGURE 4. C1
A questionnaire developed for 
the brokerage firm Carbon, 
Carbon, & Rippy by Rich 
Kleintz.
5. Point and Figure Charts
About
Less the Same More
1 2 3 4 5
6. Computerized Portfolio Analysis
About
Less the Same More
1 2 3 4 5
7. Hot Tips
About
Less the Same More
1 2 3 4 5
Circle the appropriate number for each source of information described.
1. Industry Reports
About
Less the Same More
1 2 3 4 5
2. Trend Analysis
About
Less the Same More
1 2 3 4 5
3. Computer-Generated Graphs
About
Less the Same More
1 2 3 4 5
4. Investment Advisory Services
About
Less the Same More
1 2 3 4 5
We need to
change this
questionnaire.
      -Penny


===== BOOK PAGE 127 =====

CHAPTER 4  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : InTERACTIvE  METHods     127
Measurement. Systems analysts commonly use two different forms of measurement scales:
1. Nominal scales
2. Interval scales
Nominal scales are used to classify things. A question such as the following uses a nominal scale:
What type of software do you use the most?
=1A word processo r
=2A spreadsheet
=3 A databa se
=4 An emai lp rogram
Obviously, nominal scales are the weakest forms of measurement. Generally, all an analyst can 
do with them is obtain totals for each classification.
In interval scales, the intervals between each pair of numbers are equal. Due to this char -
acteristic, mathematical operations can be performed on the questionnaire data, resulting in a 
more complete analysis. Examples of interval scales are the Fahrenheit and Celsius scales, which 
measure temperature.
By anchoring the scale on either end, the analyst may want to assume that the respondent 
perceives the intervals to be equal when they respond to this question:
How useful is the support given by the Technical Support Group?
Not Useful at All Extremely Useful
1 2 3 4 5
If the systems analyst makes this assumption, more quantitative analysis is possible.
Validity and Reliability. There are two measures of performance in constructing scales: validity 
and reliability. A systems analyst should be aware of these concerns.
Validity is the degree to which a question measures what the analyst intends for it to measure. 
For example, if the purpose of the questionnaire is to determine whether the organization is ready 
for a major change in computer operations, do the questions measure that?
Reliability measures consistency. If a questionnaire was administered once and then again 
under the same conditions and if the same results were obtained both times, the instrument is said 
to have external consistency. If the questionnaire contains subparts and these parts have equivalent 
results, the instrument is said to have internal consistency. Both external and internal consistency 
are important.
Constructing Scales. The actual construction of scales is a serious task. Careless construction of 
scales can result in the following problems:
1. Leniency
2. Central tendency
3. Halo effect
Leniency is a problem caused by respondents who are easy raters. A systems analyst can 
avoid the problem of leniency by moving the “average” category to the left (or right) of center.
Central tendency is a problem that occurs when respondents rate everything as average. 
The analyst can improve the scale (1) by making the differences smaller at the two ends, (2) by 
adjusting the strength of the descriptors, or (3) by creating a scale with more points.
The halo effect is a problem that arises when the impression formed in one question carries 
into the next question. For example, if you are rating an employee about whom you have a very 
favorable impression, you may give a high rating in every category or trait, regardless of whether 
it is a strong point of the employee’s. The solution is to place one trait and several employees on 
each page rather than one employee and several traits on a page.


===== BOOK PAGE 128 =====

128    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
Designing Questionnaires
Many of the same principles that are relevant to the design of forms for data input (as covered in 
Chapter 12) are important in designing questionnaires as well. Although the intent of a question-
naire is to gather information on attitudes, beliefs, behavior, and characteristics whose impact 
may substantially alter users’ work, respondents are not always motivated to respond. Remember 
that organization members on the whole tend to receive too many surveys, many of which are ill 
conceived and trivial.
A well-designed, relevant questionnaire can help overcome some of the resistance to 
responding. Here are some rules for designing a good questionnaire:
1. Allow ample white space.
2. Allow ample space to write or type in responses.
3. Make it easy for respondents to clearly mark their answers.
4. Be consistent in style.
When you design questionnaires for the web, apply the same rules you use when designing 
paper questionnaires. Most software packages allow you to insert one of the commonly used data 
entry formats shown in Figure 4.14. Following the four guidelines should help you gain a better 
response rate to the questionnaire.
Question Order. There is no best way to order questions on a questionnaire. Once again, as you 
order questions, you must think about your objectives in using the questionnaire and then deter-
mine the function of each question in helping you to achieve your objectives. It is also important 
to see the questionnaire through the respondents’ eyes. Some guidelines for ordering questions are:
1. Place questions that are important to respondents first.
2. Cluster items of similar content together.
3. Introduce less controversial questions first.
You want respondents to feel as unthreatened by and as interested in the questions being asked as 
possible without getting overwrought about a particular issue.
Administering Questionnaires
The topic of administering questionnaires centers around two main questions: “Who in the organiza-
tion should receive the questionnaire?” and “How should the questionnaire be administered?” Both 
questions are worth considering carefully before a questionnaire is sent. Doing so will help you 
better visualize and anticipate the data you are trying to collect with the questionnaire, and it also 
will help you plan ahead so that appropriate timing is observed in administering the questionnaire.
FIGURE 4.14
When designing a web survey, 
keep in mind that there are 
different ways to capture 
responses.
One-line text box
Name PurposeAppearance
Scrolling text box
Check box
Radio button
Drop-down menu
Push button
Used to obtain a small amount of text and
limit the answer to a few words
Used to obtain one or more paragraphs of text
Used to obtain a yes-no answer (e.g., Do you
wish to be included on the mailing list?)
Used to obtain a yes-no or true-false answer
Used to obtain more consistent results
(Respondent is able to choose the appropriate
answer from a predetermined list [e.g., a list of
state abbreviations])
Most often used for an action (e.g., a respondent
pushes a button marked “Submit” or “Clear”)


===== BOOK PAGE 129 =====

CHAPTER 4  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : InTERACTIvE  METHods     129
Respondents. Deciding who will receive the questionnaire is handled in conjunction with the task 
of setting up objectives for its results. Sampling, which is covered in Chapter 5, helps a systems 
analyst determine what sort of representation is necessary and hence what kind of respondents 
should receive the questionnaire.
Recipients are often chosen as representative because of their rank, length of service with 
the company, job duties, or special interest in the current or proposed system. Be sure to include 
enough respondents to allow for a reasonable sample in the event that some questionnaires are not 
returned or some response sheets are incorrectly completed and thus must be discarded.
“Can I bounce this off you?” he asks Terri Towell, the leader of the 
systems analysis team. “It’s a questionnaire I designed for distribu-
tion to all spa managers.”
Ever the good sport, Terri tells Tennys that she’d love to take a 
look at the form. But back in the office, Terri puts the ball in your 
court. Systematically critique Tennys’s technique, as depicted in 
Figure 4.C2, and explain to him point by point what it needs to be 
a matchless questionnaire with a winning form. Building on your 
critique, tell Tennys what he should do to rewrite the form as a web 
survey instead.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 4.5 
Order in the Courts
“I love my work,” Tennys says, beginning the interview with a 
volley. “It’s a lot like a game. I keep my eye on the ball and never 
look back,” he continues. Tennyson “Tennys” Courts is a manager 
for Global Health Spas, Inc., which has popular health and recre-
ation spas worldwide.
“Now that I’ve finished my MBA, I feel like I’m on top of the 
world with Global,” Tennys says. “I think I can really help this outfit 
shape up with its computers and health spas.”
Tennys is attempting to help your systems group, which 
is developing a cloud-based system to be used by all 80 outlets. 
FIGURE 4. C2
A questionnaire developed for managers of Global Health Spas by Tennys Courts.
QUESTIONNAIRE FOR ALL MANAGERS OF HEALTH SPAS
***URGENT***FILL OUT IMMEDIATELY AND RETURN
PERSONALLY TO YOUR DIVISION MANAGER. YOUR NEXT
PAYCHECK WILL BE WITHHELD UNTIL IT IS CONFIRMED
THAT YOU HAVE TURNED THIS IN.
In 10 words or fewer, what complaints have you lodged about
the current computer system in the last six months to a year?
Are there others who feel the same way in your outlet as you
do? Who? List their names and positions.
1.                                                      2.
3.                                                      4.
5.
7.
What is the biggest problem you have when communicating
your information requirements to headquarters? Describe it
brieﬂy.
How much computer downtime did you experience last year?
1 - 2 - 3 - 4 - 5 - 6 - 7 - 8 - 9 - 10 -
Is there any computer equipment you never use?
Description          Serial Number
Do you want it removed?  Agree       Neutral       Disagree
In your opinion, what’s next as far as computers and Global
Health Spas are concerned?
Thanks for ﬁlling this out.  • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
T erri
     Please help
me improve this
form.
     T ennys


===== BOOK PAGE 130 =====

130    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
Methods of Administering a Questionnaire. A systems analyst has several options for administer-
ing a questionnaire, and the choice of administration method is often determined by the existing 
business situation. Options for administering the questionnaire include the following:
1. Convening all concerned respondents at one time.
2. Handing out blank questionnaires personally and taking back completed ones.
3. Allowing respondents to self-administer the questionnaire at work and drop it in a centrally 
located box.
4. Mailing questionnaires to employees at branch sites and supplying a deadline, instructions, 
and return postage.
5. Administering the questionnaire electronically either via email or on the web.
Each of these five methods has advantages and disadvantages. Most commonly, respondents 
are allowed to self-administer a questionnaire. Response rates with this method are a little lower 
than with the other methods because people may forget about the form, lose it, or purposely ignore 
it. Self-administration, however, allows people to feel that their anonymity is ensured and may 
result in less guarded answers from some respondents. Both email and web surveys fall into the 
category of self-administered questionnaires.
Administering a questionnaire electronically, either via email or posted on the web, is one way 
to quickly reach current system users. Costs of duplication are minimized. In addition, responses 
can be made at the convenience of the respondent and then can be automatically collected and 
stored electronically. Some software permits respondents to begin answering a survey, save their 
answers, and return to it for completion if they are interrupted. Reminders to respondents can 
be easily and inexpensively sent via email, as can notifications to the analyst about when the 
respondent has opened the email. Some software now turns email data into data tables for use in 
spreadsheet or statistical analysis software. One of the popular services for creating and adminis-
tering online surveys is a company called SurveyMonkey (see www.surveymonkey.com). It is a 
cloud-based Software as a Service company that acquired an email marketing services company 
called Intuit MailChimp to add to its product offerings. MailChimp allows organizations to send 
email newsletters and design, send, and track email campaigns.
Research shows that respondents are willing to answer questions about highly sensitive 
matters via the internet. Thus, questions that may be difficult to pose in person regarding systems 
problems may be acceptable to ask on a web survey.
REQUIREMENTS PRIORITIZATION
Systems analysts have introduced another topic, called requirements prioritization. It is 
a confusing name because the term requirements used here is different from the information 
requirements we have been discussing in this chapter. When determining information require -
ments, we’ve been listening to our clients to determine their goals and their fears, the policies 
and procedures that are part of their organization, and the information that is needed to develop 
or improve their current systems.
Requirements prioritization now involves the client or customer as well. Interviewing and 
administering questionnaires are not effective ways to ask a customer which features they desire in 
the final product. Asking a client what feature is least important in developing their website would be 
awkward at best and perhaps unanswerable by a customer who hasn’t thought about specific features.
In this section we use the terms “requirements,” “features,” and “deliverables” interchangeably. 
We will assume there are 24 statements of requirements for illustrating these methods.
Six methods used for requirements prioritization are:
1. Simple ranking
2. 100-token method
3. MoSCoW method
4. Urgent/Important Matrix
5. Analytic hierarchy processing
6. Q-sort
These six methods are pictured in Figure 4.15.


===== BOOK PAGE 131 =====

CHAPTER 4  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : InTERACTIvE  METHods     131
Simple Ranking
By using simple ranking, a systems analyst can simply ask all interested parties to rank-order 
a list of requirements under consideration by assigning a 1 to the most desirable requirement and a 
10 to the least desirable. While it is possible to accomplish this with 10 requirements, this method 
breaks down when attempting to evaluate 24 alternatives.
What if you were asked to rank all the restaurants you’ve ever dined in? Do you feel comfort-
able giving each one a number? After the first few, does this process seem boring and futile? Does 
it make a difference if a restaurant is number 20 or 21? Now the process isn’t so simple. Most 
people aren’t good at making and ordering a long list of any sort.
100-Token Method
In the 100-token method, suppose an analyst set out 24 glasses on a table, one for each require-
ment, and gave each participant 100 tokens to distribute among the 24 glasses according to what 
they perceive to be the importance of the requirement. The participant may put all 100 tokens 
into one glass if they want or put an equal number of tokens in each glass, but those acts would 
mean they are letting other participants prioritize the requirements. But saying this requirement 
is worth x number of tokens for each of the 24 requirements is easier than assigning a rank to 
each requirement.
One problem is that putting a token in a glass can be anonymous. We lose the information 
regarding which department placed the tokens, yet we know that multidepartment buy-in is 
FIGURE 4.15
Six methods used for requirements 
prioritization.
M
100-Token Method
Simple Ranking
MoScoW method
S
C
W
I/Nu I/u
Urgent/Important Matrix
AHP Q- SORT
NI/Nu NI/u


===== BOOK PAGE 132 =====

132    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
a good predictor of success. Using different-colored tokens for each department may be use-
ful, but this method is still very simplistic. Most assume there are better ways to prioritize 
requirements.
MoSCoW Method
Rather than asking participants to rank everything, the MoSCoW method asks participants to put 
the requirement into one of four “buckets” or categories:
1. Must
2. Should
3. Could
4. Won’t
Note that the uppercase letters M, S, C, and W stand for the four categories. Must means that 
a requirement must be completed for the project to be considered a success. Should means that the 
requirement should be included if there is time and money available to do so, but if they are not, 
the project can still be deemed a success. Could means that after all the must and should catego-
ries have been completed, a requirement could be considered. It might add some value but does 
not have to be included. Won’t requirements are those that will not be adopted at this time.
One criticism of this method is that once a requirement is considered a won’t requirement, it 
will never have a chance of being implemented. Another criticism is that categories are too broad, 
and a systems analyst will not be able to tell priorities within the large categories.
Urgent/Important Matrix
A similar approach to MoSCoW is called the Urgent/Important Matrix, which can be drawn on 
a whiteboard. The horizonal x-axis is meant to show urgency and the vertical y-axis represents 
importance. Participants would write the requirement or a code assignment to that requirement in 
the quadrant they felt it belonged.
An analyst would tackle the requirements that are deemed both important and urgent by 
most of the participants. Then the analyst might want to consider those requirements that are 
marked “Not important but urgent” so that additional goals can be met before the release date. 
At some point in the future those activities deemed both not important and not urgent should not 
be considered.
Analytic Hierarchy Processing (AHP)
A much more complex method is called analytic hierarchy processing (AHP), which presents 
pairs of alternatives to participants and has the participant decide which of the two are more 
important. If we have 24 requirements, we start by making 12 comparisons, then work our way 
up to the final pairwise comparison. Doing that over and over will eventually produce a ranked 
list of requirements.
This method is time-consuming but has shown good results for large, important decisions. An 
analyst seeking the opinions of participants can make this fun by using a metaphor of a tournament 
(like the NCAA March Madness basketball event in the United States) where the winners move 
up to another game and the losers drop out.
Q-Sorts
Q-sorts involve sorting a deck of cards of requirements into piles and therefore is similar to the 
100-token and MoSCoW methods. It differs from these methods because the participant must 
place a certain number of requirements in each pile. The number of requirements a participant 
will place in each pile are not the same. Rather, they are arranged like a normal distribution for 
24 requirements. The piles from the right (most important) to the left (least important) should 
hold 2, 5, 10, 5, and 2, respectively.
While performing the Q-sort, participants will move cards back and forth among piles. In 
our example, if pile 5 already had two requirements, but the participant felt that the one in their 
hands was more appropriate for pile 5, they would look at the other requirements and determine 
which one needed to be moved from pile 5 to pile 4. It is clear that this comparison is similar to 
the pair-wise comparisons using AHP mentioned before.


===== BOOK PAGE 133 =====

CHAPTER 4  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : InTERACTIvE  METHods     133
There are advantages to using Q-sorts:
1. To a participant, there is no pressure on getting it right the first time. Requirements can be 
moved interactively from one pile to another.
2. By requiring the participants to sort statements into a forced normal distribution, many 
of the problems associated with questionnaires (e.g., central tendency, leniency) can be 
avoided.
3. An analyst can identify participants that have similar attitudes by examining how they 
sorted the deck of requirements, even if they are from different departments or units.
4. Finally, participants usually think it’s fun to arrange and rearrange these requirements from 
one pile to another.
One disadvantage of a Q-sort is that all of the requirements must be pre-printed on cards so 
that they can be sorted easily.
In the foregoing section we provided six unique methods to do requirements prioritization. 
Be wary of the path of least resistance. The simplest method to get set up and to administer will 
not necessarily yield the highest-quality results. It’s better to know the culture of the organiza-
tion first, then choose a method that equates with the extent of effort organizational members are 
willing to give to produce useful requirements prioritization.
Summary
This chapter covers four of the key interactive methods for information gathering that the systems analyst 
can use: interviewing, joint application design, construction of questionnaires, and six methods of require-
ments or features prioritization. During the process of interviewing, a systems analyst should listen for 
human–computer interaction (HCI) concerns related to ergonomics, aesthetics, usability, and usefulness, as 
well as goals, feelings, opinions, and informal procedures in interviews with organization decision makers. 
Interviews are planned question-and-answer dialogues between two people. An analyst can use an interview 
to develop a relationship with a client, to observe the workplace, and to collect data. Interviews should pref-
erably be conducted in person, although in times of exigencies that prevent face-to-face contact, there are 
robust video-calling platforms like Zoom, Microsoft Teams, and so on that can be used.
The five steps to take in planning an interview are to read background material, establish interviewing 
objectives, decide who to interview, prepare the interviewee, and decide on question types and structure.
Questions are of two basic types: open-ended or closed. Open-ended questions leave open all response 
options for the interviewee. Closed questions limit the possible options for response. Probes or follow-
up questions can be either open-ended or closed, but either way, they ask the respondent for a more 
detailed reply.
Interviews can be structured in three basic ways: pyramid, funnel, or diamond. Pyramid structures begin 
with detailed, closed questions and broaden to more generalized questions. Funnel structures begin with 
open-ended, general questions and then funnel down to more specific, closed questions. Diamond-shaped 
structures combine the strengths of the other two structures, but they take longer to conduct. Trade-offs are 
involved when deciding how structured to make interview questions and question sequences.
To cut both the time and cost of personal interviews, analysts may want to consider joint application 
design (JAD) instead. Using JAD, analysts can both analyze human information requirements and design 
a user interface with users in a group setting. Careful assessment of the particular organization culture will 
help an analyst judge whether JAD is suitable.
By using questionnaires (surveys), systems analysts can gather data on HCI concerns, attitudes, beliefs, 
behavior, and characteristics from key people in the organization. Surveys are useful if people in the orga-
nization are widely dispersed, if many people are involved with the systems project, if exploratory work is 
necessary before recommending alternatives, and if there is a need for problem sensing before interviews 
are conducted.
Once objectives for the survey are set, the analyst can begin writing either open-ended or closed ques-
tions. Ideally, the questions should be simple, specific, short, free of bias, not patronizing, technically accu-
rate, addressed to those who are knowledgeable, and written at an appropriate reading level. The systems 
analyst may want to use scales either to measure the attitudes or characteristics of respondents or to have 
respondents act as judges for the subject of the questionnaire. Scaling is the process of assigning numbers 
or other symbols to an attribute or characteristic.
Consistent control of the questionnaire format and style can result in a better response rate. Web surveys 
can be designed to encourage consistent responses. In addition, the meaningful ordering and clustering of


===== BOOK PAGE 134 =====

134    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
questions is important for helping respondents understand the questionnaire. Surveys can be administered 
in a variety of ways, including electronically via email or the web or with the analyst present in a group of 
users. Software or Software as a Service is available to automatically create, distribute, and then tabulate 
email or web responses.
Systems analysts can use storytelling as a complement to other information-gathering methods. 
You need to involve users by reacting to stories, matching one story to another by recounting it to other 
participants, and even collaborating with the participant to reframe and understand organization stories. It is 
a useful way to understand problems associated with the use of technology, systems development, systems 
adoption, and systems design. The systems analyst needs to listen to the story as a whole to truly understand 
its content and purpose.
Systems analysts can use one of the six methods of requirements prioritization—simple ranking, 
the 100-token method, the MoSCoW method, Urgent/Important Matrix, analytic hierarchy processing, or 
Q-sort—to help users prioritize what software features they identify as most important in a proposed system.
Keywords and Phrases
analytic hierarchy processing (AHP)
central tendency
closed questions
diamond-shaped structure
dichotomous closed questions
funnel structure
halo effect
interval scale
joint application design (JAD)
leniency
MoSCoW method 
nominal scale
100-token method
open-ended questions
probes
pyramid structure
Q-sort
questionnaire
reliability
requirements prioritization
simple ranking
stories
validity
video calling
video conferencing
Zoom fatigue
Review Questions
1. What kinds of information should be sought in interviews?
2. List the five steps in interview preparation.
3. List two popular video-conferencing platforms.
4. What is “Zoom fatigue”?
5. Define what is meant by open-ended interview questions. List eight benefits and five drawbacks of 
using them.
6. When are open-ended questions appropriate for use in interviewing?
7. Define what is meant by closed interview questions. List six benefits and four drawbacks of using 
them.
8. When are closed questions appropriate for use in interviewing?
9. What is a probing question? What is the purpose of using a probing question in interviews?
10. Define what is meant by pyramid structure. When is it useful to employ this structure in interviews?
11. Define what is meant by funnel structure. When is it useful to employ this structure in interviews?
12. Define what is meant by diamond-shaped structure. When is it useful to employ this structure in 
interviews?
13. What are seven elements common to stories told by users in the organization?
14. What are the four reasons users tell stories to analysts?
15. Define joint application design (JAD).
16. List the situations that warrant use of JAD in place of personal organization interviews.
17. List the potential benefits of using JAD.
18. List the three potential drawbacks of using JAD as an alternative to personal interviews.
19. What kinds of information is a systems analyst seeking by using questionnaires or surveys?
20. List four situations in which the use of questionnaires is appropriate.
21. What are the two basic question types used on questionnaires?
22. List two reasons a systems analyst would use a closed question on a questionnaire.
23. List two reasons a systems analyst would use an open-ended question on a questionnaire.
24. What are the seven guidelines for choosing language for a questionnaire?


===== BOOK PAGE 135 =====

CHAPTER 4  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : InTERACTIvE  METHods     135
25. Define what is meant by scaling.
26. What are two kinds of information or scales that systems analysts most commonly use?
27. What are nominal scales used for?
28. Give an example of an interval scale.
29. When should an analyst use an interval scale?
30. Define reliability as it refers to the construction of scales.
31. Define validity as it refers to the construction of scales.
32. List three problems that can occur because of careless construction of scales.
33. What four actions can be taken to ensure that a questionnaire’s format is conducive to a good 
response rate?
34. Which questions should be placed first on a questionnaire?
35. Why should questions on similar topics be clustered together?
36. What is an appropriate placement for controversial questions?
37. List five methods for administering a questionnaire.
38. What considerations are necessary when questionnaires are web based?
39. What are the six methods of requirements prioritization an analyst can use to help users prioritize 
software features?
40. Which method is preferred for determining requirements prioritization?
41. List a drawback of each of the six requirements prioritization methods.
42. What are the four advantages of Q-sorting?
Problems
1. As part of your systems analysis project to update the automated accounting functions for Xanadu 
Corporation, a manufacturer of digital cameras, you will interview Nawaf Aljohani, the chief accoun-
tant. Write four to six interview objectives covering his use of information sources, information for-
mats, decision-making frequency, desired qualities of information, and decision-making style.
a. In a paragraph, write down how you will approach Nawaf to set up an interview.
b. State which structure you will choose for this interview. Why?
c. Nawaf has four subordinates who also use the system. Would you interview them also? Why or 
why not?
d. Would you also try to interview customers (visitors to the website)? Are there better ways to get 
the opinions of customers? Why or why not?
e. Write three open-ended questions that you will email to Nawaf prior to your interview. Write a 
sentence explaining why it is preferable to conduct an interview in person or on a video call rather 
than via email.
f. Describe how you would ask Nawaf to tell a relevant story. What seven elements should you listen for?
2. Here are five questions written by one of your systems analysis team members. Her interviewee is 
the local manager of LOWCO, an outlet of a national discount chain, who has asked you to work on 
a management information system to provide inventory information. Review these questions for your 
team member.
1. When was the last time you thought seriously about your decision-making process?
2. Who are the troublemakers in your store—I mean the ones who will show the most resistance to 
changes in the system that I have proposed?
3. Are there any decisions you need more information about before you can make them?
4. You don’t have any major problems with the current inventory control system, do you?
5. Tell me a little about the output you’d like to see.
a. Rewrite each question, so it is more effective in eliciting information.
b. Order your questions in either a pyramid, funnel, or diamond-shaped structure and label the 
questions with the name of the structure you used.
c. What guidelines can you give your team member for improving her interviewing questions in 
the future? Make a list of them.
3. Ever since you walked through the door, your interviewee, Robin Tang, has been shuffling papers, 
looking at his watch, and drumming on his desk with his fingers. Based on what you know about 
interviews, you guess that Robin is nervous because of the other work he needs to do. In a paragraph, 
describe how you would deal with this situation so that the interview can be accomplished with 
Robin’s full attention. (Robin cannot reschedule the interview for a different day.)
4. Write a series of six closed questions that cover the subject of decision-making style for the manager 
described in Problem 2.
5. Write a series of six open-ended questions that cover the subject of decision-making style for the 
manager described in Problem 2.


===== BOOK PAGE 136 =====

136    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
6. Examine the interview structure presented in the sequencing of the following questions:
1. How long have you been in this position?
2. What are your key responsibilities?
3. What reports do you receive?
4. How do you view the goals of your department?
5. How would you describe your decision-making process?
6. How can that process best be supported?
7. How frequently do you make those decisions?
8. Who is consulted when you make a decision?
9. What is the one decision you make that is essential to departmental functioning?
a. What structure is being used? How can you tell?
b. Restructure the interview by changing the sequence of the questions (you may omit some, if 
necessary). Label the reordered questions with the name of the structure you have used.
7. The following is the first interview report filed by one of your systems analysis team members:  
“In my opinion, the interview went very well. The subject allowed me to talk with him for an hour 
and a half. He told me the whole history of the business, which was very interesting. The subject also 
mentioned that things have not changed all that much since he has been with the firm which is about 
16 years. We are meeting again soon to finish the interview because we did not have time to go into 
the questions I prepared.”
a. In two paragraphs, critique the interview report. What critical information is missing?
b. What information is extraneous to the interview report?
c. If what is reported really occurred, what three suggestions do you have to help your teammate 
conduct a better interview next time?
d. How could the interviewer get the interviewee to share a relevant story?
8. Shan Xiao is a newly hired systems analyst with your group. Shan has always felt that questionnaires 
are a waste. Now that you will be doing a systems project for Ground Ride Sharing (GRS), a national 
ride-sharing firm with branches and employees in 130 cities, you want to use a questionnaire to elicit 
some opinions about the current and proposed systems.
a. Based on what you know about Shan and GRS, list three persuasive reasons Shan should use a 
survey for this study.
b. Given your careful arguments, Shan has agreed to use a questionnaire but strongly urges that all 
questions be open-ended so as not to constrain the respondents. In a paragraph, persuade Shan 
that closed questions are useful as well. Be sure to point out the trade-offs involved with each 
question type.
9. “Every time we get consultants in here, they pass out some goofy questionnaire that has no meaning 
to us at all. Why don’t they bother to personalize it, at least a little?” asks Raj Sharman, head of emer-
gency systems. You are discussing the possibility of beginning a systems project with Pohattan Power 
Company (PPC) of Far Meltway, New Jersey.
a. What steps will you follow to customize a standardized questionnaire?
b. What are the advantages of adapting a questionnaire to a particular organization? What are the 
disadvantages?
c. How could soliciting stories from users before writing the questionnaire make it more relevant?
10. A sample question from the draft of the AlwaysOn Power Company questionnaire reads:
I have been with the company:
20–upward years
10–15 years upward
5–10 years upward
Less than a year
Check one that most applies.
a. What kind of a scale is the question’s author using?
b. What errors have been made in the construction of the question, and what might be the possible 
responses?
c. Rewrite the question to achieve clearer results.
d. Where should the question you’ve written appear on the questionnaire?
11. Also included on the PPC questionnaire is this question:
When residential customers call, I always direct them to our website to get an answer.
Sometimes Never Always Usually
1 2 3 4
a. What type of scale is this intended to be?
b. Rewrite the question and possible responses to achieve better results.


===== BOOK PAGE 137 =====

CHAPTER 4  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : InTERACTIvE  METHods     137
12. Figure 4.EX1 is a questionnaire designed by an employee of Green Toe Textiles, which specializes 
in manufacturing men’s socks. Di Wooly wrote the questionnaire because, as the office manager at 
headquarters in Juniper, Tennessee, she is concerned with the proposed purchase and implementation 
of a new computer system.
a. Provide a one-sentence critique for each question given.
b. In a paragraph, critique the layout and style in terms of white space used, room for responses, ease 
of responding, and so on.
13. Based on what you surmise Di Wooly is trying to get through the questionnaire, rewrite and reor-
der the questions (use both open-ended and closed questions) so that they follow good practice and 
result in useful information for the systems analysts. Indicate next to each question that you write 
whether it is open-ended or closed and write a sentence indicating why you have written the question 
this way.
14. Redesign the questionnaire you created for Di Wooly in Problem 13 for use in an email. Write a para-
graph that says what changes were necessary to accommodate email users.
15. Redesign the questionnaire you created for Di Wooly in Problem 13 as a web survey. Write a para-
graph that says what changes were necessary to accommodate web users.
Group Projects
1. With your group members, role-play a series of interviews with various system users at Maverick 
Transport. Each member of your group should choose one of the following roles: company president, 
information technology director, dispatcher, customer service agent, or truck driver. Those group 
members playing roles of Maverick Transport employees should attempt to briefly describe their job 
responsibilities, goals, and informational needs.
Remaining group members should play the roles of systems analysts and devise interview ques-
tions for each employee. If there are enough people in your group, each analyst may be assigned to 
interview a different employee. Those playing the roles of systems analysts should work together 
to develop common questions that they will ask, as well as questions tailored to each individual 
employee. Be sure to include open-ended, closed, and probing questions in your interviews.
Maverick Transport is attempting to change from outdated and unreliable technology to more 
state-of-the-art, dependable technology. The company is seeking to move from PCs connected to 
a mainframe because it wants to use tablets to improve worker mobility, and it is also interested in 
investigating a cloud-based system for tracking freight and drivers. In addition, the company is inter-
ested in pursuing ways to cut down on the immense storage requirements and difficult access of the 
troublesome handwritten, multipart forms that accompany each shipment.
2. Conduct all five interviews in a role-playing exercise. If there are more than 10 people in your group, 
permit two or more analysts to ask questions. Remember to devote part of the interview to asking for 
and listening to stories from each interviewee.
FIGURE 4. EX1
A questionnaire developed by  
Di Wooly.
Hi! All Employees
What’s new? According to the grapevine, I hear we’re in for a new computer. Here
are some questions for you to think about.
a. How long have you used the old computer?
b. How often does it go down?
c.  Who repairs it for you?
d. When was the last time you suggested a new improvement to the computer
    system and it was put into use? What was it?
e. When was the last time you suggested a new improvement to the computer
    system and nobody used it? What was it?
f. Do you use a VDT or printer or both?
g. How fast do you type?
h. How many people need to access the database regularly at your branch? Is there
    anyone not using the computer now who would like to?


===== BOOK PAGE 138 =====

138    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
3. With your group, write a plan for a JAD session that takes the place of personal interviews. Include 
relevant participants, suggested setting, and so on.
4. Using the interview data you gained from the group exercise on Maverick Transport in Group Project 1, 
meet with your group to brainstorm the design of a questionnaire for the hundreds of truck drivers 
that Maverick Transport employs. Recall that Maverick is interested in implementing a cloud-based 
system for tracking freight and drivers. There are other systems that may affect the drivers as well.  
As your group constructs the questionnaire, consider the drivers’ familiarity with the proposed 
technology as well as the time constraints the drivers are under for completing such a form.
5. Using the interview data you gained from the group exercise on Maverick Transport in Group Proj-
ect 1, your group should meet to design an email or web questionnaire for surveying the company’s 
20 programmers (15 of whom have been hired in the past year) about their skills, ideas for new or 
enhanced systems, and so on. Investigate the web survey options available at SurveyMonkey.com. 
As your group constructs the computer programmer survey, consider what you have learned about 
users in the other interviews as well as what vision the director of information technology has for the 
company.
6. Divide your group into three distinct teams considering the case of a large manufacturer and online 
seller of sports clothing and health accessories called Ganymede Fitness. They manufacture and 
sell clothing including shirts, shorts, pants, and headbands and some fitness technology products. 
They are a privately held, global company headquartered in Seattle, Washington, that has a corporate 
slogan stating, “Helping the world get fit, happy, and healthy, one person at a time.”
a. Assign team members so that there are an equal number of team members in each of the following 
three groups:
Team 1 systems analysts. This team should take the position of systems analysts who have been 
asked to gather feelings of two groups—Team 2, the consumers of Ganymede Fitness products 
and their website content, and Team 3, the Ganymede Fitness ecommerce managers, who were 
asked about the usefulness of recommendation systems and ratings systems for online shop-
ping. Eventually, the analysts will be tasked with designing recommendation systems and rating 
systems for Ganymede Fitness.
Team 2 Ganymede Fitness product users and website users. This team is made up of avid 
users of Ganymede Fitness products (which are only available on their website), many of whom 
have been with them since their opening in 2010. They have eagerly adopted all of the products 
Ganymede Fitness offered, most recently their fitness technology products.
Team 3 Ganymede Fitness ecommerce managers. This team is composed of ecommerce man-
agers who work for Ganymede Fitness and are charged with keeping the ecommerce portion of 
the website up to date. They would like to know more about their customers so that the website 
becomes more personalized with recommendations for purchases and ratings of their products. 
They would also like to find out from the systems analysts what the possibilities are for improving 
their website.
b. Each team should meet virtually or face to face and reaffirm their purpose as a team. During their 
initial meeting, Team 1 should prepare a series of interview questions for both Teams 2 and 3. 
Team 1 of systems analysts should prepare a list of six open-ended questions for the users and 
a list of six open-ended questions for the ecommerce managers. Team 2 of product and website 
users should discuss and create a common list of sports clothing and health accessories they have 
purchased or would consider purchasing online and what their favorite features of each product 
are. Team 3 of ecommerce managers should write six interview questions for Team 1 about what 
kind of support for online purchases, including ratings and recommendations, they can provide. 
Team 3 should also prepare six questions for Team 2 about their website preferences.
c. Once each team has completed their assignment, they should meet face to face or in a monitored 
chat room (using whatever technology is available to the class) to role-play the tasks and per-
spectives outlined for each team in part a. Team 1 should take the lead and begin interviewing 
members of Team 2. Team 3 should join in asking any questions that have not yet been asked of 
Team 2, and also following up on the initial questions with probing questions. Team 1 should 
move to the next phase and ask their prepared questions of Team 3 about how useful ratings and 
recommendations would be to the Ganymede Fitness website. Assigning a scribe or note taker for 
each team to write notes about answers will help move the process along for the last step.
d. Each of the three teams should meet separately (face to face or online) as a team to discuss what 
they learned in response to their questions. Each team should write a brief one-page report that 
includes the date, time of day, length of interview, and participants in the interview. The one-page 
report should include a summary of key information learned in the interview, and also include a 
list of any points that were raised but that still need to be clarified.
7. To extend exercise 6 above, teams working on the Ganymede Fitness case can share their written 
reports with the other two teams (via posting on the course website or via email) to compare where


===== BOOK PAGE 139 =====

CHAPTER 4  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : InTERACTIvE  METHods     139
they are in terms of understanding the usefulness of improving the ecommerce website for Ganymede 
Fitness with product ratings and recommendations. Teams can make a brief oral presentation of what 
they learned in the interview process, including (1) any suggestions for new material for the website 
and (2) any follow-up questions they would like to ask and which team members they would like to 
ask additional questions.
8. Each of the three teams working on the Ganymede Fitness case should design an online survey 
based on their experience with conducting interviews. The online survey should be developed for 
a specific audience, either Team 2 of Ganymede Fitness product and website users or Team 3 of 
Ganymede Fitness ecommerce managers. The online survey should pose both open-ended and closed 
questions about the desirability of adding product rankings and recommendations to the Ganymede 
Fitness website.
Selected Bibliography
Ackroyd, S., & Hughes, J. A. (1992). Data collection in context (2nd ed.). Addison-Wesley.
Alvesson, M. (2010). Interpreting interviews. Sage.
Cash, C. J., & Stewart Jr., W. B. (2010). Interviewing principles and practices (13th ed.). McGraw-Hill.
Cooper, D. R., & Schindler, P. S. (2013). Business research methods (12th ed.). McGraw-Hill/Irwin.
Deetz, S. (1995). Transforming communication, transforming business: Building responsive and respon-
sible workplaces. Hampton Press.
Eisenhower's Urgent/Important Principle. (n.d.). https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/newHTE 
_91.htm.
Emerick, D., Round, K., & Joyce, S. (2000). Exploring web marketing and project management.  
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Fauville, G., Luo, M., Queiroz, A. C. M., Bailenson, J. N., & Hancock, J. (2021). Zoom Exhaustion &  
Fatigue Scale. Computers in Human Behavior Reports, 4, 100119.
Gane, C. (1987). Rapid system development: using structured techniques and relational technology.  
Rapid System Development.
Greenwald, A. G., & Lai, C. K. (2020). Implicit social cognition. Annual Review of Psychology, 71, 
419–445.
GVU WWW Survey Through 1998. (1998). www.cc.gatech.edu/gvu/user_surveys/survey-1998-10/.
Hennel, P., & Rosenkranz, C. (2021). Investigating the “socio” in socio-technical development: The case 
for psychological safety in agile information systems development. Project Management Journal, 
52(1) 11–30.
Hessler, R. M. (1992). Social research methods. West.
Joint application design (GUIDE Publication GPP-147). (1986). GUIDE International.
Kendall, J. E., & Kendall, K. E. (2012). Storytelling as a qualitative method for IS research: Heralding the 
heroic and echoing the mythic. Australasian Journal of Information Systems, 17(2), 161–187.
Kendall, J. E., & Kendall, K. E. (2017). Enhancing executive online education using storytelling: An 
approach to strengthening online social presence. Decision Sciences Journal of Innovative Education, 
15(1), 62–81.
Mason, B. (2020, June 4). Q & A – Psychologist Anthony Greenwald curbing implicit bias: 
What works and what doesn’t. Knowable. https://knowablemagazine.org/article/mind/2020/
how-to-curb-implicit-bias.
Peterson, R. A. (2000). Constructing effective questionnaires. Sage.
Strauss, J., & Frost, R. (2013). E-marketing (7th ed.). Routledge.
Thomas, M. (2016, April 1). Open source software opens door to web design career. https://opensource 
.com/life/16/4/my-open-source-story-mark-thomas.
Wansink, B., Sudman, S., & Bradburn, N. M. (2004). Asking questions: The definitive guide to question-
naire design—for market research, political polls, and social and health questionnaires (2nd ed.). 
Wiley, 2004.
Woo, K. (2022, April 14). Best Zoom alternatives for video calling. https://www.tomsguide.com/news 
/best-zoom-alternatives.


===== BOOK PAGE 140 =====

140
Information Gathering: 
Unobtrusive Methods
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Once you have mastered the material in this chapter, you will be able to:
1 Learn how to construct useful samples of people, documents, and events.
2 Learn how to analyze quantitative documents with the goal of improving their design.
3 Analyze qualitative documents for useful clues that will help you understand the current 
situation.
4 Be able to interpret managers' and customers' messages, interviews, and communications 
using text analytics.
5 Understand what process mining is and how it can be used to determine any bottlenecks, 
variations, or exceptions.
6 Learn how workplace analytics can monitor and improve on worker and team 
participation.
7 Observe decision makers’ behavior and create an analyst's playscript to observe decision 
makers' activities.
8 Observe the physical environment by applying the STROBE technique to observe and 
interpret.
Just by being present in an organization, a systems analyst changes it. However, unobtrusive 
methods such as sampling, investigating, and observing a decision maker’s behavior and 
interacting with their physical environment are less disruptive than other ways of eliciting human 
information requirements. Text analytics is software that can analyze qualitative data from any 
unstructured written source. Interviews, written reports, or customers’ communication collected 
through wikis, blogs, chat rooms, and other social networking sites provide analysts and decision 
makers with insights about the organization. Process-mining and task-mining applications can 
unobtrusively and automatically gather data about processes from enterprise systems like 
SAP and others. Workplace analytics can monitor and improve worker and team participation 
while still protecting privacy and confidentiality. They help to identify problems and recommend 
improvements to processes. Unobtrusive methods are insufficient information-gathering 
methods when used alone. Rather, they should be used in conjunction with one or more interactive 
methods such as those studied in the previous chapter. This is called a multiple methods approach. 
Using both interactive and unobtrusive methods in approaching an organization is a wise practice 
that will result in a more complete picture of human information requirements.
5
CHAPTER

