
===== BOOK PAGE 141 =====

CHAPTER 5  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : UnobTRUsIvE  METHods     141
SAMPLING
Sampling is the process of systematically selecting representative elements of a population. When 
these selected elements are examined closely, analysis of the sample will reveal useful information 
about the population as a whole.
A systems analyst must make decisions on two key issues. First, people in the organization 
have generated many reports, forms, output documents, memos, and websites. Which of these 
should the systems analyst pay attention to, and which can the systems analyst safely pass over?
Second, a great many employees may be affected by the proposed information system. Which 
people should the systems analyst interview, seek information from via questionnaires, or observe 
in the process of carrying out their decision-making roles?
The Need for Sampling
There are many reasons a systems analyst would want to select either a representative sample of 
data to examine or representative people to interview, question, or observe. They include:
1. Containing costs
2. Speeding up data gathering
3. Improving effectiveness
4. Reducing bias
Examining every scrap of paper, talking with everyone, and reading every web page from the 
organization is far too costly for the systems analyst. Copying reports, asking employees for valuable 
time, and duplicating unnecessary surveys would result in much needless expense. Sampling helps 
accelerate the process by gathering selected data rather than all data for the entire population. In 
addition, the systems analyst is spared the burden of analyzing data from the entire population.
Effectiveness in data gathering is an important consideration as well. Sampling can help 
improve effectiveness if information that is more accurate can be obtained. Such sampling 
is accomplished, for example, by talking to fewer employees but asking them more detailed 
questions. In addition, if fewer people are interviewed, the systems analyst can afford the time 
to follow up on missing or incomplete data, thus improving the effectiveness of data gathering.
office tidy will probably enjoy the humor in this video, while people 
who prefer to make their space comfortable and familiar may find 
the manager in this video obnoxious and even cruel. After you view 
the video, please reflect on the following questions:
1. Some people will state that “A cluttered desk suggests a 
cluttered mind.” The comeback can be “Empty desk, empty 
mind.” Which statement resonates with you? Why?
2. An employee leaves customer files on their desk, writes their 
password on a sticky note and fastens it on their computer 
display, and places sensitive photos on their desk. What 
should we be concerned about?
3. If a company issues a policy that employees must declutter 
their offices, how can the company examine their own 
practices, for example, by decluttering their signage on 
bulletin boards and wording in memos?
4. Examining a person’s office can reveal many things about 
how they process, store, and use data. Why is it important to 
understand that people are unique and have different ways  
to do their work?
SYSTEMS SCENARIO  
Surveying the Cluttered Desk
In this chapter you learn about unobtrusive ways to gather information. 
One of the approaches is to use observation to understand the 
organizational environment. This chapter’s video is about decluttering 
the office of data. While the manager in the video is relentless in 
requiring employees to clean up their messes, employee’s personal 
lives and their comfort level is ignored. Someone who keeps their 
To view the video for this scenario,  
see eText Chapter 5.
Seven Dimensions/Boclips


===== BOOK PAGE 142 =====

142    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
Finally, data-gathering bias can be reduced by sampling. When the systems analyst interviews 
an executive of the corporation, for example, the executive is involved with the project because 
this person has already given a certain amount of time to the project and would like it to succeed. 
When the systems analyst asks for an opinion about a permanent feature of the current informa-
tion system, the executive interviewed may provide a biased evaluation because there is little 
possibility of changing it.
Sampling Design
A systems analyst must follow four steps to design a good sample:
1. Determine the data to be collected or described.
2. Determine the population to be sampled.
3. Choose the type of sample.
4. Decide on the sample size.
These steps are described in detail in the following subsections.
Determining the Data to Be Collected or Described. A systems analyst needs a realistic plan about 
what will be done with the data collected. If irrelevant data are gathered, then time and money are 
wasted in the collection, storage, and analysis of useless data.
The duties and responsibilities of the systems analyst at this point are to identify the variables, 
attributes, and associated data items that need to be gathered in the sample. The objectives of the 
study must be considered, as well as the type of data-gathering method (for example, investigation, 
interviews, questionnaires, and observation) to be used. The kinds of information sought when 
using each of these methods are discussed in more detail in this and subsequent chapters.
Determining the Population to Be Sampled. Next, a systems analyst must determine the size of 
the population. In the case of hard data, the systems analyst needs to decide, for example, whether 
data from the last two months are sufficient or whether an entire year’s worth of reports is needed 
for analysis.
Similarly, when deciding whom to interview, the systems analyst has to determine whether the 
population should include only one level in the organization or all the levels. Perhaps the analyst 
will need to go outside the system and include the reactions of customers, vendors, suppliers, or 
competitors as well. These decisions are explored in more detail in upcoming sections.
Choosing the Type of Sample. A systems analyst can use one of four main types of samples, as 
shown in Figure 5.1. They are convenience, purposive, simple random, and complex random. 
Convenience samples are unrestricted and nonprobability samples. A sample could be called a 
convenience sample if, for example, the systems analyst posts a notice on the company’s intranet 
asking for everyone interested in working with the new sales performance reports to come to a 
FIGURE 5.1
Four main types of samples a 
systems analyst has available. Sample elements are
   selected directly
   without restrictions
Convenience Simple random
Sample elements are
   selected according
   to speciﬁc criteria
Complex random
(systematic, stratiﬁed,
and cluster)
Purposive
Not Based on Probability Based on Probability
The systems
analyst should
use a complex
random sample
if possible.


===== BOOK PAGE 143 =====

CHAPTER 5  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : UnobTRUsIvE  METHods     143
meeting Tuesday morning. Obviously, this sample is the easiest to arrange, but it is also the least 
reliable. A purposive sample  is based on judgment. The systems analyst chooses a group of 
individuals who appear knowledgeable and who are interested in the new information system. 
Although this sample is based on criteria—knowledge about and interest in the new system—
purposive sampling is also a nonprobability sample and is only moderately reliable. If the analyst 
chooses a simple random sample, the sample must come from a numbered list of the population 
to ensure that each document or person in the population has an equal chance of being selected. 
This step often is not practical, especially when sampling involves documents and reports. 
Complex random samples that are most appropriate for a systems analyst are (1) systematic 
sampling, (2) stratified sampling, and (3) cluster sampling.
In the simplest method of probability sampling, systematic sampling, the systems analyst 
would, for example, choose to interview every kth person on a list of company employees. This 
method has certain disadvantages, however. The analyst would not want to use it to select every 
kth day for a sample because of the potential periodicity problem. Furthermore, a systems analyst 
would not use this approach if the list were ordered (for example, a list of banks, from the smallest 
to the largest) because bias would be introduced.
Stratified samples are perhaps the most important tool for a systems analyst. Stratification 
is the process of identifying subpopulations, or strata, and then selecting objects or people for 
sampling in these subpopulations. Stratification is often essential if the systems analyst is to 
gather data efficiently. For example, if the analyst seeks opinions from a wide range of employees 
on different levels of the organization, systematic sampling selects a disproportionate number 
of employees from the operational control level. A stratified sample compensates for this. 
Stratification also is called for when a systems analyst wants to use different methods to collect 
data from different subgroups. For example, the analyst may use a survey to gather data from 
middle managers but use personal interviews to gather similar data from executives.
Sometimes a systems analyst must select a group of people or documents to study. This 
process is referred to as cluster sampling. Suppose an organization has 20 help desks scattered 
across the country. The analyst may select one or two of these help desks, under the assumption 
that they are typical of all the help desks.
Deciding on the Sample Size. If everyone in the population viewed the world the same way 
or if each of the documents in a population contained exactly the same information as every 
other document, a sample size of one would be sufficient. Of course, this is not the case, so it is 
necessary to set a sample size greater than one but less than the size of the population itself.
It is important to remember that the absolute number is more important in sampling than the 
percentage of the population. We can obtain satisfactory results sampling 20 people in 200 or 
20 people in 2,000,000.
The Sample Size Decision
The sample size often depends on the cost involved or the time required by the systems analyst, 
or even the time available from people in the organization. This subsection provides guidelines 
for determining the required sample size under ideal conditions—for example, to determine what 
percentage of input forms contain errors or what proportion of people to interview.
A systems analyst follows seven steps, some of which involve subjective judgments, to 
determine the required sample size:
1. Determine the attribute (in this case, the type of errors to look for).
2. Locate the database or reports in which the attribute can be found.
3. Examine the attribute. Estimate p, the proportion of the population having the attribute.
4. Make the subjective decision regarding the acceptable interval estimate, i.
5. Choose the confidence level and look up the confidence coefficient (z value) in a table.
6. Calculate pσ , the standard error of the proportion, as follows:
i
zpσ=
7. Determine the necessary sample size, n, using the following formula:
n pp1 1
p
2
()= −
σ +


===== BOOK PAGE 144 =====

144    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
The first step, of course, is to determine which attribute to sample. Once this is done, find out 
where these data are stored, perhaps in a database, on a form, or in a report.
It is important to estimate p, the proportion of the population having the attribute, to set the 
appropriate sample size. Many textbooks on systems analysis suggest using a heuristic of 0.25 for 
()pp1– . This value almost always results in a sample size larger than necessary because 0.25 
is the maximum value of ()pp1– , which occurs only when =p 0.50.  When =p 0.10, as is 
more often the case, ()pp1–  becomes 0.09, resulting in a much smaller sample size.
Steps 4 and 5 are subjective decisions. The acceptable interval estimate of ±0.10 means 
the analyst is willing to accept an error of no more than 0.10 in either direction from the actual 
proportion, p. The confidence level is the desired degree of certainty, such as 95 percent. Once 
the confidence level is chosen, the confidence coefficient (also called a z value) can be looked up 
in a table similar to the one found in this chapter.
Steps 6 and 7 complete the process by taking the parameters found or set in Steps 3 through 
5 and entering them into two equations to eventually solve the required sample size.
Sylva glances at him furtively and begins to interrupt, “It’s a 
little out of our area of consulting expertise, but I understand that 
fake fur doesn’t ever really break down after it’s discarded and can 
be bad for the environment. But there’s a company working with 
a popular designer now that’s developing a corn-based material 
for faux fur that’s supposed to be a better alternative for the 
environment. So, there is hope for increased sales in the longer term. 
That aside, for your current project, it will take months to talk to 
everyone, and purchasing may come apart at the seams unless they 
know soon what . . . ”
Pelt interrupts, “I don’t care how long it takes if we get the right 
answers. But they have to be right. Not knowing how to solve this 
dilemma about fake furs is making me feel like a leopard without 
its spots.”
Sylva talks to Sam Pelt a bit longer and then ends the interview 
by saying, “I’ll talk it all over with the other analysts at the office 
and let you know what we come up with. I think we can outfox the 
other furriers if we use software to help us sample opinions rather 
than trapping unsuspecting customers into giving an opinion. But 
I’ll let you know what they say. This much is for sure: if we can 
sample and not talk to everybody before deciding, every coat you 
sell will have a silver lining.”
As one of the systems analysts who is part of Sylva Foxx’s firm, 
suggest some ways that Sam Pelt can use software to adequately 
sample the opinions of his customers, store managers, buyers, and 
any others you feel will be instrumental in making the strategic 
decision regarding the stocking of fake or faux furs in what has 
always been a genuine fur store. In a paragraph, suggest a type of 
sample for each group and justify it. The constraints you are subject 
to include the need to act quickly to remain competitive, the need 
to retain a low profile, so competing furriers are unaware of your 
fact gathering, and the need to keep costs of data gathering to a 
reasonable level.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 5.1 
Trapping a Sample
“Real or fake? Fake or real? Who would have thought it, even 
five years ago?” howls Sam Pelt, a furrier who owns stores in New 
York, Washington, D.C., Beverly Hills, and Copenhagen. Sylva 
Foxx, a systems analyst with her own consulting firm, is talking 
with Sam for the first time. Currently, P & P, Ltd. (which stands 
for Pelt and Pelt’s son) is using a networked computer that supports 
package software for a select customer mailing list, accounts pay-
able and accounts receivable, and payroll.
Sam is interested in making some strategic decisions that will 
ultimately affect the purchasing of goods for his four fur stores. 
Sales for real fur were down about 40 percent over the last two 
decades due to shifts in consumer perspectives on the desirability 
of using real fur in fashion coupled with new international regu-
lations prohibiting the farming of animals for their fur. Although 
the computer might help, Sam believes other approaches should be 
considered as well.
Sam continues, “I think we should talk to all the customers 
when they come in the door. Get their opinions. You know, some 
of them are getting very upset about wearing fur from endangered 
species. They’re very environmentally minded. They prefer fake to 
real if they can save a baby animal. Some even like fakes better, 
calling them ‘fun furs.’ And I can charge almost the same for a good 
look-alike. Also, some countries already banned fur farming, so we 
have to be careful not to offend international customers.”
“It’s a very fuzzy proposition, though. If I get too far away 
from my suppliers of pelts, I may not get what I want when I need 
it. They see the fake fur people as worms, worse than moths! If  
I deal with them, the real fur suppliers might not talk to me. They 
can be animals. On the other hand, I feel strange showing fakes in 
my stores. All these years, we’ve prided ourselves on having only 
the genuine article.”
Sam continues, in a nearly seamless monologue, “I want to talk 
to each and every employee too.”


===== BOOK PAGE 145 =====

CHAPTER 5  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : UnobTRUsIvE  METHods     145
FIGURE 5.2
A systems analyst can use a table 
of area under a normal curve to 
look up a value once the confi-
dence level is decided.99% 2.58
98 2.33
97 2.17
96 2.05
95 1.96
90 1.65
80 1.28
50 0.67
Conﬁdence
Level
Conﬁdence
Coefﬁcient
(z value)
First decide on
the conﬁdence
level …
… then look up
the z value. 
Example
The foregoing steps can best be illustrated by an example. Suppose the A. Sembly Company, a 
large manufacturer of shelving products, asks you to determine what percentage of orders contain 
errors. You agree to do this job and perform the following steps:
1. Determine that you will be looking for orders that contain mistakes in names, addresses, 
quantities, or model numbers.
2. Locate copies of order forms from the past six months.
3. Examine some of the order forms and conclude that only about 5 percent (0.05) contain 
errors.
4. Make a subjective decision that the acceptable interval estimate will be ±0.0 2.
5. Choose a confidence level of 95 percent. Look up the confidence coefficient (z value) in 
Figure 5.2. The z value equals 1.96.
6. Calculate σ p as follows:
σ= ==i
z
0.02
1.96 0.0102p
7. Determine the necessary sample size, n, as follows:
() ()
() ()
= −
σ += +=n pp1 1 0.05 0.95
0.0102 0.0102 1 458
p
2
The conclusion, then, is to set the sample size at 458. Obviously, a greater confidence level 
or a smaller acceptable interval estimate would require a larger sample size. If we keep the 
acceptable interval estimate the same but increase the confidence level to 99 percent (with a z 
value of 2.58), the necessary sample size becomes 1,827, a figure much larger than the 458 we 
originally decided to sample.
Determining Sample Size When Interviewing. There are no magic formulas to help a systems 
analyst set the sample size for interviewing. The overriding variable that determines how many 
people a systems analyst should interview in depth is the time an interview takes. A true in-depth 
interview and a follow-up interview are very time-consuming for both the interviewer and the 
participant.
A good rule of thumb is to interview at least three people at every level of the organization and 
at least one from each of the organization’s functional areas (as described in Chapter 2) who will 
work directly with a new or updated system. Remember also that it is not necessary to interview 
more people just because it is a larger organization. If the stratified sample is done properly, a 
small number of people will adequately represent the entire organization.


===== BOOK PAGE 146 =====

146    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
Analyzing Quantitative Documents
Investigation is the act of discovery and analysis of data. When investigating evidence in an 
organization, an analyst acts like Sherlock Holmes, the fabled detective from 221B Baker Street.
As a systems analyst works to understand users, their organization, and its information 
requirements, it becomes important to examine different types of hard data that offer information 
unavailable through any other method of data gathering. Hard data reveal where the organization 
has been and where its members believe it is going. To piece together an accurate picture, the 
analyst needs to examine both quantitative and qualitative hard data.
Many quantitative documents are available for interpretation in any business, and they 
include reports used for decision making, performance reports, records, and a variety of forms. 
All of these documents are targeted for specific purposes and audiences.
Systematically Examining Quantitative Documents
A systems analyst needs to obtain some of the documents used in running the business. These 
documents often are paper reports regarding the status of inventory, sales, production, and 
employee and customer satisfaction. Many of these reports are not complex, and they can provide 
feedback for quick action. For example, a sales report may summarize the amount sold and the 
type of sales. In addition, sales reports might include graphical output comparing revenue and 
income over a set number of periods. Such reports enable the decision maker to spot trends easily.
Production reports include recent costs, current inventory, labor, and plant information. 
Service reports include the delivery of services and reports on employee performance and customer 
satisfaction. In addition to using these key reports, decision makers use many summary reports 
to provide background information, spot exceptions to normal occurrences, and afford strategic 
overviews of organization plans. The following reports, records, and forms deserve special attention.
Performances Reports. Most performance reports take the general form of actual versus intended 
performance. One important function of performance reports is to assess the size of the gap 
between actual and intended performance. It is important to be able to determine whether that 
gap is widening or narrowing as an overall trend in whatever performance is being measured. 
Figure 5.3 shows a clear improvement in sales performance over two to three months. The 
analyst will want to note whether a performance measurement is available and adequate for key 
organization areas.
FIGURE 5.3
A performance report showing 
improvement.
Number of
Batches
Produced
Number of
Batches
Rejected
Percentage Amount
Away from
5% Goal
Week Rejected
2/2 245 19 7.8 2.8
2/9 229 19 8.3 3.3
2/16 219 14 6.3 1.3
2/23 252 13 5.2 0.2
3/2 245 13 5.3 0.3
3/9 260 13 5.0 * * * 
3/16 275 14 5.1 0.1
3/23 260 13 5.0 * * * 
3/30 260 13 5.0 * * * 
4/6 244 12 4.9 * * * 
4/13 242 11 4.5 * * * 
4/20 249 11 4.4 * * * 
4/27 249 11 4.4 * * * 
      * * * indicates met or exceeded the < 5% goal
Performance
reports
show goals …
… and trends.


===== BOOK PAGE 147 =====

CHAPTER 5  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : UnobTRUsIvE  METHods     147
Records. Records provide periodic updates of what is occurring in the business. If the record 
is updated in a timely fashion by a careful recorder, it can provide much useful information 
to a systems analyst. Figure 5.4 is a manually completed payment record for an apartment 
rental. An analyst can inspect a record in different ways, many of which are indicative of their 
usability:
1. Checking for errors in amounts and totals
2. Looking for opportunities for improving the recording form design
3. Observing the number and type of transactions
4. Watching for instances in which the computer can simplify the work through calculations 
and other data manipulation
Data Capture Forms. Before you set out to change the information flows in an organization, 
you need to be able to understand the system that is currently in place. Check with managers to 
determine which forms are available online to customers as well as those that are exclusively used 
internally by employees. You or one of your team members may want to download, collect, and 
catalog a blank copy of each form (official or unofficial) that is in use. (Sometimes businesses have 
a person already charged with forms management, who would be your first source for actual forms 
in use.) Remember to print out any web-based forms that require users to print them. Alternatively, 
electronic versions that can be submitted via the web or email can be identified and stored in a 
database for later inspection.
Blank forms, along with their instructions for completion and distribution, can be compared 
with filled-in forms to see whether any data items are consistently left blank on the forms; 
whether the people who are supposed to receive the forms actually do get them; and if they 
follow standard procedures for using, storing, and discarding them. When creating a catalog 
“I agree,” says Rod. “When I come back from my analysis of 
these figures,” he says, indicating a large stack of material he has 
unearthed from Fields field offices, “we’ll be able to deliver.”
Three weeks later, Rod returns to Clay with wilting confidence. 
“I don’t know what to make of all this. I can’t seem to get at what’s 
causing the company’s growth, or how it’s managed. They’ve been 
expanding, but I’ve been through all the figures, and nothing really 
seems to make sense yet.”
Clay listens empathetically and then says, “You’ve given me a 
germ of an idea. What we need is some cross-pollination, a breath of 
fresh air. We need to dig a little deeper. Did you examine anything 
but their bottom line?”
Rod looks startled and replies, “No, I—uh—what do you 
mean?”
How can Clay Potts tactfully explain to Rod Golden that exam-
ination of qualitative as well as quantitative documents could be 
important in delivering an accurate assessment of Fields’ potential 
to be a more fruitful enterprise? In a paragraph, recommend some 
specific documents that should be read. List the specific steps Rod 
should follow in evaluating qualitative documents obtained from 
Fields. Write a paragraph to explain how qualitative documents help 
in presenting an overall account of Fields’ success.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 5.2 
A Rose by Any Other Name . . . Or Quality, Not Quantities
“I think we have everything we need. I’ve sampled financial 
statements, sales figures for each branch, waste for each shop—we 
have it all. With all these numbers, we should be able to figure 
out how to keep Fields in the green, or at least at the forefront of 
the flower business. We can even show Seymour Fields himself 
how his new computer system can make it all happen,” says Rod 
Golden, a junior systems analyst working for a medium-sized con-
sulting group.
The firm, under the supervision of its head systems analyst Clay 
Potts, has been working on a systems project for the entire chain of 
15 successful florist shops and indoor floral markets called Fields. 
Each of three Midwestern cities has five Fields outlets.
“Although it’s just a budding enterprise now, eventually we 
want to grow with offshoots to half a dozen states,” says Seymour 
Fields, the owner. “I want to reap the benefits of all the happiness 
we’ve sown so far. I think we can do it by playing my hunches about 
what is the best time to purchase flowers at each European market 
we buy from, and then we should prune back our purchases.”
“Over the past three years, I’ve written lots of memos to our 
managers about this plan. They’ve written some good ones back 
too. I think we’re ready to stake out some territory on this soon,” 
continues Seymour, painting a rosy picture of Fields’ future.


===== BOOK PAGE 148 =====

148    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
of forms to help you understand the information flow currently in use in the business, follow 
these steps:
1. Collect examples of all the forms in use, whether officially sanctioned by the business or 
not (official versus bootleg forms).
2. Note the type of form (printed in-house, handwritten, computer-generated in-house, online 
forms, web fill-in forms, printed externally and purchased, and so forth).
3. Document the intended distribution pattern.
4. Compare the intended distribution pattern with who actually receives the form.
Although this procedure is time-consuming, it is useful. Another approach is to sample 
data-capture forms that have already been completed. Remember to check databases that store 
consumer data when sampling input from ecommerce transactions. An analyst must keep in mind 
many particular questions, as illustrated in Figure 5.5. They include the following aspects of 
human–computer interaction (HCI) relating to usability, aesthetics, and usefulness:
1. Is the form filled out in its entirety? If not, what items have been omitted and are they 
consistently omitted? Why?
2. Are some forms never used? Why? (Check the design and appropriateness of each form for 
its purported function.)
FIGURE 5.4
A manually completed payment record.
PAYMENT RECORD: T o t. 31175/0 + 81299 + Rent = TOTAL INITIAL PAYMENT REQUIRED: 
855 55 910 H/S dep. 4
Date Date Receipt Paid to Total Secur- Clean- 31700 81299 Other Amount Balance
Due Paid Number Noon Rent ity ing Tax Dates Amt. Descr . Am t . Paid Due
TV 10/3 MO! 8/28 8/28 106642 9 /30 1031.32 202 115 44.20 25 4 1 4 .82 15 1430.52 0
10/1 10/3 107503 10/31 91 0 910 0
11/1 11/1 10935 11/16 485.28 485.28 0
C1H/S9-16 11/17 11/8 11200 11/23 212.31 212.31 0
Bill 1 MO 11/24
Prorated
H/S should be
created toward
refund deposit
BLDG. # NAME
Orig. Move-in Date d Exp. x #
Base Refrig- Furni- Total Secur- Clean- 31700 Daily
Rent erator ture Rent ity ing Tax Rate
8-28 same 1
Kendall 1st
PROJ. NAME # KEY SIGNATURE
RENT POTENTIAL 1175/0 81299 PRORATE
A/C Util. HMSR T.V. Maid 31175/0 81299 Days Totals
DEPOSIT
POTENTIAL
Deposits
Memo Only 31175/0
OAK. FC 562
H/Srent 30.33 1.30 91039
200 115 31.63 340
910 1430.52
15.00
121.32
5.20
Check for errors.
Look for
opportunities
for improvement
in design.
Observe the
number and type
of transactions.
Watch for places
the computer can
simplify the work.


===== BOOK PAGE 149 =====

CHAPTER 5  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : UnobTRUsIvE  METHods     149
3. Are all copies of forms circulated to the proper people or filed appropriately? If not, why 
not? Can people who must access online forms do so? Check on permissions needed and 
whether links to forms are functioning properly.
4. If a paper form is offered as an alternative to a web-based form, compare the completion 
rates for both.
5. Are “unofficial” or bootleg forms being used on a regular basis? (This may indicate a 
problem in standard procedures or may indicate political battles in the organization over 
who is controlling the type of input and who enters data.)
ANALYZING QUALITATIVE DOCUMENTS
Qualitative documents include written email messages, memos, signs on bulletin boards and in 
work areas, web pages, procedure manuals, and policy handbooks. Many of these documents are 
rich in details that reveal the expectations for behavior of others that their writers’ hold and the 
ways in which users expect to interact with information technologies.
FIGURE 5.5
Questions to ask about official 
and bootleg forms that are already 
filled out.
Date Store Name Store Number
Item Requested Cases Item Requested Cases
Milk (1/2 gals.) Milk (quarts)
Whole Whole
2% 2%
1% 1%
Skim Skim
Buttermilk Buttermilk
Chocolate Chocolate
Yogurt
Plain Pineappl e
Vanilla Dutch Appl e
Peach Banana
Blueberry Mixed Frui t
Boysenberr y Raspberr y
Strawber ry Lemon
Ice Cream
Deluxe Pints Deluxe Quarts
D eluxe 1/2 Gallons Premium Pints
Skinny Minnies Premium Quarts
Requested by (employee number)       Total Cases Ordered
Reason for Shortage
Driver Number Route Number
Farmfresh
Reorder of Shorted Dairy Products
Store Date Driver
Dai ry  manager’s initials
Oﬃcial form can
overwhelm people
by asking for too
much information.
There may be
no logical order
to the form.
Is the total
really needed?
“Bootleg” forms
arise to simplify
the problem.
Cases neededProduct shorted


===== BOOK PAGE 150 =====

150    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
Systematically Examining Qualitative Documents
Although many systems analysts are apprehensive about analyzing qualitative documents, they 
need not be. Several guidelines can help analysts take a systematic approach to this sort of analysis. 
Many of these relate to the affective, emotional, and motivational aspects of HCI, as well as to 
interpersonal relationships in the organization:
1. Examine documents for key or guiding metaphors.
2. Look for insiders versus outsiders or an “us against them” mentality.
3. List terms that characterize good or evil and appear repeatedly in documents.
4. Look for the use of meaningful messages and graphics posted on common areas or on web 
pages.
5. Recognize a sense of humor if present.
It is important to examine documents for key or guiding metaphors because language shapes 
behavior; thus, the metaphors we employ are critical. For example, an organization that discusses 
employees as “part of a great machine” or “cogs in a wheel” might be taking a mechanistic view of 
the organization. Notice that the guiding metaphor in the memo in Figure 5.6  is “We’re one big happy 
family.” An analyst can use this information to predict the kinds of metaphors that will be persuasive 
in the organization. Obviously, if one department is battling another, it may be impossible to gain any 
cooperation on a systems project until the politics are resolved in a satisfactory manner. Assessing 
the use of humor provides a quick and accurate barometer of many HCI, interpersonal, and organi-
zational variables, including which subculture a person belongs to and what kind of morale exists.
Memos. Along with the five preceding guidelines, an analyst should consider who sends memos 
(check email threads) and who receives them. Typically, most information flows downward and 
horizontally rather than upward in organizations, and extensive email systems mean messages 
are sent to many work groups and individuals. Memos reveal a lively, continuing dialogue in 
the organization. Analysis of memo content provides the analyst with a clear idea of the values, 
attitudes, and beliefs of organization members.
Signs or Posters on Bulletin Boards or in Work Areas. Although signs may seem incidental to 
what is happening in an organization, they serve as subtle reinforcers of values to those who read 
them. Slogans posted such as “Quality Is Forever” or “Safety First” give an analyst a sense of the 
official organizational culture.
Corporate Websites. An analyst should view websites used for business-to-consumer (B2C) 
ecommerce as well as those used for business-to-business (B2B) ecommerce. Examine the 
contents for metaphors, humor, use of design features (such as color, graphics, animation, and 
FIGURE 5.6
Analysis of memos provides 
insight into the metaphors that 
guide the organization’s thinking.
MEMO
To : All Night Call Desk Staﬀ
From: S. Leep, Night  Manager
Date: 2/15/2023
Re: Get Acquainted Party T onight
It’s a pleasure to welcome two new 11-7 Call Desk staﬀ members,
Twyla Ti ne and Al Knight.  I’m sure they’ll enjoy working
here. Being together in the wee hours makes us feel like
one big happy family. Remember for your breaks tonight
that some of the crew has brought in food. Help yourself
to the spread you ﬁnd in the break room, and welcome to
the clan, Twyla and Al.


===== BOOK PAGE 151 =====

CHAPTER 5  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : UnobTRUsIvE  METHods     151
hyperlinks), and the meaning and clarity of any messages provided. Think about the website from 
three dimensions: technical, aesthetic, and managerial. Are there discrepancies between the stated 
goals of the organization and what is presented to the intended viewer? How much customization 
of the website is available for each user? How much personalization of the website is possible? If 
the analyst is not designing ecommerce sites for the organization, how does what the analyst sees 
on its website affect the systems being investigated? Remember to note the level of interactivity 
of the website(s), the accessibility of the visuals and text, and the security level. Many of these 
metrics are available from the company’s internet provider, and they can provide a different look 
at the company. Analysts should ask for access to this type of data if it is thought to be relevant 
to the systems being proposed.
Manuals. Other qualitative documents an analyst should examine are organizational manuals, 
including manuals for computer operating procedures and online manuals. Analyze manuals 
following the five guidelines spelled out previously. Remember that manuals present the “ideal,” 
the way machines and people are expected to behave. Many manuals are now developed for use 
on the web, which increases the likelihood that they will be consulted. It is important to recall that 
printed manuals are rarely kept current and are sometimes relegated to shelves, unused.
Policy Handbooks. The last type of qualitative document we consider is the policy handbook. 
Although these documents typically cover broad areas of employee and corporate behavior, a 
systems analyst is primarily concerned with those that address policies about computer services, 
use, access, security, and charges. Examining policies allows a systems analyst to gain awareness 
of the values, attitudes, and beliefs guiding the corporation.
USING TEXT ANALYTICS
Text analytics is software that can analyze unstructured qualitative data from any source, 
including transcripts of interviews, written reports, or customers’ communication collected 
through email, wikis, blogs, chat rooms, and other social networking sites. These data provide 
analysts and decision makers with insights about the organization. You may have the opportunity 
to develop systems that help an organization’s users interpret and understand the unstructured 
data in their companies. Unstructured, qualitative, or “soft” data are generated through blogs, chat 
rooms, questionnaires using open-ended questions, online discussions conducted on the web, and 
exchanges occurring on social media such as Facebook, YouTube, WhatsApp, Instagram, Weixin, 
WeChat, TikTok, and other web-generated dialogues between customers and an organization. Text 
analytics can help organizational decision makers realize valuable insights from unstructured data 
into what customers are thinking about the organization, the values and actions of the company, 
and customer or vendor motivations for beginning, maintaining, improving, or discontinuing 
a relationship. (In contrast, you learn in Chapter 13 that structured data is well organized and 
searchable by standard queries and algorithms through data analytics. An example is data 
stored in a relational database or data gathered from machine sensors. The largest portion of an 
organization’s information comes from this type of analysis.)
Many large and small analytics software solutions are available, both proprietary and open 
source. If you have been active in helping an organization develop and implement an online 
presence, then incorporating text analytics into the new systems makes a lot of sense. As you 
design systems to support an online presence, text analytics should be included to help the 
company make use of its online presence.
Text analytics provide insights for an organization’s members who want to have a rapid 
and visual yet decidedly qualitative approach to analyzing text data. Leximancer, a powerful 
text-analytics software tool from an Australian company, offers a straightforward approach for 
which no setup is required. Rather, the role of the organizational user who will use the software 
is to contribute relevant knowledge about what is to be fed into the system, so concepts and other 
diagrams generated by the software are useful.
In general terms, users of Leximancer software submit documents and then omit words they 
don’t want to include in analysis (such as a  and the); then, the software performs a keyword 
count. The body of the text is then broken up into segments, and the concepts that result form a 
“thesaurus” of words that journey through the text document together.


===== BOOK PAGE 152 =====

152    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
Figure 5.7 shows a concept map generated with some interview data from the Open Source 
Communities project, creating a different visual display of the text from interviews. As mentioned 
previously, submitting your documents to the software generates a concept map. Notice how 
different the data appear, with the user’s thesaurus words, such as Linux, projects, trying, and 
process conceptually hanging together and the term community separate but related to those 
concepts through people.
Figure 5.8 shows the ranked concepts for the Open Source Communities project using 
Leximancer. This ranked bar chart format shows the most prominent concepts within the 
designated category. Notice the prominence of the relationship between the category “community” 
FIGURE 5.7
Concept map showing prominence 
and relationships of concepts in 
Open Source Communities project 
interview data. (Copyright © by 
Leximancer Pty Ltd. Reprinted 
with permission.)
FIGURE 5.8
Ranked concepts for categories overview for the Open Source Communities project using the Leximancer 
Insight Dashboard. (Copyright © by Leximancer Pty Ltd. Reprinted with permission.)
Category: community
Concept Rel Freq
(%) Prominence
2development 4.1
2information 4.1
4source 2.9
< 1system 0.0
< 1project 0.0
< 1team 0.0
< 1organization 0.0
< 1
Strength
(%)
5
5
4
< 1
< 1
< 1
< 1
< 1product 0.0
11 4
5 3
5 2
< 1 < 1
< 1 < 1
< 1 < 1
< 1 < 1
< 1 < 1
project
system
source
team
organization
development
product
information
Category: license
Concept Rel Freq
(%)
Strength
(%) Prominence
8.6
7.1
3.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0


===== BOOK PAGE 153 =====

CHAPTER 5  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : UnobTRUsIvE  METHods     153
and the use of the word development. The user can visually see the prominent relationship between 
the category “license” and use of the word project.
Your expertise in designing an interface as well as the system is especially critical here. Part 
of what you must do is demonstrate to the organization the value of using analysis of unstructured, 
qualitative data to identify and predict future trends in customer, vendor, and supplier behavior. 
Another important element is to design the human activities surrounding the use of text-analytics 
software. Incorporating the tools is not enough. Remember that you are not just converting 
qualitative data to quantitative data. Instead, you are developing systems that include text analytics 
software as a useful means to an end. Include guidelines and suggestions for how decision makers 
should view the qualitative results, how they might interpret the qualitative results, and how the 
evidence from those results can be used to make well-reasoned, logically based recommendations, 
which in turn can be acted on to improve the organization.
PROCESS MINING
As you can see, there are many ways a systems analyst can unobtrusively study an organization 
and determine where it is possible to make improvements. An analyst looks at the current state 
of a system, in other words, describes the system “as is” before they suggest what “should be.”
Analyzing existing systems can be very time-consuming and costly, so if the analysis can 
be done automatically, it would be valuable in many ways. One method, called process mining, 
is an automated, unobtrusive process that scans processes found through APIs (application pro-
gramming interfaces) in packages from company software products such as SAP, Salesforce, and 
Oracle, among others, and identifying where problems may exist. These enterprise applications 
record all activities, which are the data used in process mining.
One organization that stands out in process mining is Celonis (www.celonis.com), which 
controls over 60 percent of the process mining market, and is acknowledged as the leader in 
process mining technology by The Gartner Goup (2019). However, there are other companies 
such as UIPath, Fluxicon, and QPR Software competing in this space to provide process mining as 
well. With apps from these providers, systems analysts can analyze the data collected by enterprise 
applications and determine the root cause of the problems a company has encountered.
Celonis defines process mining as “an analytical discipline for discovering, monitoring, and 
improving business processes as they actually are- not as you think they might be” (ww.celonis.com). 
The Gartner Group (www.gartnergroup.com) states that process mining “provides visibility and 
understanding of actual business operations and processes by applying a set of algorithms to events.”
According to UIPath.com, there are four steps to process mining:
1. Discover
2. Optimize/Automate
3. Monitor
4. Act
In the Discover step, the process-mining app reads the data collected from enterprise systems 
and creates an event log, keeping track of what event happened and when an event happened. 
During this step, a path is drawn, showing bottlenecks, variations, and exceptions.
In the Optimize/Automate step, improvement takes place. While it might be possible to retrain 
employees to perform tasks in a better way, this may be the opportune time to automate some of 
the tasks. Automation may be less expensive and more sustainable than retraining employees.
In the Monitor step, the systems analyst needs to observe and determine what effect the 
optimize/automate phase had on the path. It is possible, for example, that automating just moved 
the bottleneck further down the path.
The fourth step, Act, gives the company the incentive to move forward with any changes that 
are needed based on the previous steps. Companies can search for new technological solutions to 
adopt, can call for new legislation, or make changes that will affect their bottom line.
Let’s look at a customer fulfilment and invoicing system. Suppose a company wants to know 
how the system is performing from day-to-day. The questions can include the following, as well 
as other questions: Are the processes running smoothly? Are there any bottlenecks in creating 
orders? Are deliveries going out to customers on time? Are customers getting billed properly? Is 
the company receiving payments on time? Are customers delaying payments?


===== BOOK PAGE 154 =====

154    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
Process mining can be used to monitor whether the processes consistently handle the volume 
of transactions from day to day, monitor order time from beginning to end, track deliveries that 
go out late, monitor invoice creation and distribution time, and determine payments outstanding. 
A decision maker can determine what is causing the most problems and take the action necessary 
to get the processes running smoothly.
Some of these remedies can be automated, while other problems may need to be handled by 
employees. For instance, if a company wants to make sure that a customer has paid the last invoice 
before making another shipment, an employee can examine the data on a day-by-day basis and 
adjust the delivery date. This, however, is time-consuming. With process mining, the application 
could see data from SAP and automatically determine whether the customer is paid up and auto-
matically adjust the ship date accordingly.
According to Shah (2022), “process mining is a family of techniques that bridges technical 
data analysis and business impact.” As a professor who researches and teaches process mining, 
Shah notes that Celonis process mining “offers a way to quantify carbon footprints at much deeper 
levels of operations than traditional dashboards.”
Some of the ways in which Celonis process mining can help organizations is to enable 
analysts to 1) conduct an analysis of root causes of wastefulness and inefficiencies in processes, 2) 
recommend improvements to organizations that mitigate identified wastefulness and inefficiencies, 
and 3) provide the quantifiable impacts of proposed changes on the organization.
Figure 5.9 features an example from Celonis. The figure shows that the process is too 
complicated and may be causing delays, returns, and billing issues. The ideal path is a vertical 
line consisting of the following processes: “Create Sales Order,” “Generate Delivery Document,” 
“Release Delivery,” “Ship Goods,” and “Send invoice.” Every time an activity branches out from 
a straight, vertical path, it means that the system “as is” is inefficient and needs action. Activities 
like “Approve Credit Check” and “Change Price” are examples of inefficient processes. Under the 
column titled “Impact,” the cost of late deliveries, returns, and unbilled orders are clearly marked.
Simulation can be useful here as well. Figure 5.10 shows the results of a simulation (the path 
on the right) compared to a system identified through process mining (the path on the left). The 
simulation shows potential improvement in process time cycles and process cost distribution.
In addition to process mining, there is task mining. Task mining is an unobtrusive desktop 
capture of the tasks performed by an organization’s employees. Task mining makes it possible 
FIGURE 5.9
This screen from Celonis software shows bottlenecks in the process. (Courtesy: Celonis)


===== BOOK PAGE 155 =====

CHAPTER 5  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : UnobTRUsIvE  METHods     155
to see what individuals are doing. Like process mining, it is possible to figure out what can be 
improved. Taken together, process mining and task mining are valued ways to keep all systems 
running smoothly. Examples of popular task-mining software include Microsoft Viva, Allactivity, 
and Activtrak. Task mining is part of a broader activity called workplace analytics.
One of the keys to Celonis’ approach to users is the formation of its global academic alliance 
for process and task mining. Over 700 academic institutions involved with this alliance are training 
undergraduates and graduate students in the essentials of process mining, including process 
discovery, analysis building, conformance checking, and process automation, so the availability 
of specialized training you require for process mining should become accessible in the next 
few years.
WORKFORCE ANALYTICS
Managers would like to ensure that they have the right employees for the task on hand and that 
employees are treated equally by sharing the workload. They would also like to be able to monitor 
employee performance or determine the value of an application the organization has subscribed 
to. Generally, it would be ideal to boost productivity overall. The COVID-19 pandemic has made 
companies more aware of balance, utility, and productivity, and the emphasis on workforce 
management will prominently figure into the future of organizations.
In the past, managers could observe employees at their desks as well as observing teams in 
meetings. Remote work encouraged different ways to assess productivity, but even if everyone 
returns to the office, workforce analytics have now become most sophisticated and more revealing.
One answer is to automate collecting information about workloads and performance. 
Workforce analytics can be used for the following:
1. Ensuring the right workers are in the right place
2. Balancing the workload among the staff
3. Comparing workers’ or team’s performance
4. Realizing where bottlenecks in workflows occur
5. Determining which apps are used more than others
6. Realizing which apps deliver more productivity
FIGURE 5.10
This simulation from Celonis software shows the results of removing bottlenecks. (Courtesy: Celonis)


===== BOOK PAGE 156 =====

156    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
One example of workforce management is ActivTrak, a workforce and productivity soft-
ware as a service platform. In addition to collecting data on the workforce and processing that 
information to accomplish the objectives mentioned earlier, they maintain they are committed to 
safeguarding data privacy and security of employees and customers of the company.
ActivTrak claims to accomplish this without:
1. Email monitoring
2. Keystroke logging
3. Personal device monitoring
4. Access to the employee’s camera
5. Video recording
Workforce management should not be about surveillance or spying. Workforce analytics 
processes the data it collects in order to gain insights on how work is done, what tools and apps 
are used to get work done, how teams interact, and to identify where improvement is possible. 
After further analysis, a manager can determine whether any changes are needed.
Understanding Application Usage and Website Visits
ActivTrak can automatically classify apps and websites as being productive or nonproductive and 
even categorize apps by type (such as email, meeting apps, customer relationship apps, and so on) 
in order to get insights into how time is spent. A systems analyst may want to ask questions like 
“Which communication tools are employees using most: email, messaging, or collaboration?”  
or “How does application usage vary by individual?” Figure 5.11 is an ActivTrak report that 
shows which websites were visited most and gives a breakdown by person per hour in order to 
understand current website visiting.
FIGURE 5.11
This ActivTrak report shows which sites were visited by the employees. (Images courtesy of ActivTrak, 2022)


===== BOOK PAGE 157 =====

CHAPTER 5  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : UnobTRUsIvE  METHods     157
For reports like this, it is possible then to identify what activities are consuming the most 
amount of time. A manager can identify a situation where distractions take place (relying on social 
media apps or email, for example). In addition, analytics can help a manager determine whether 
there are apps with redundant functions. If two subscription apps accomplish the same tasks, 
perhaps one can be eliminated.
Identifying When and Why Workers Lose Focus
On any workday it is easy to lose focus on the tasks that will solve the organization’s problems. 
For example, employees can find themselves multitasking by searching information or joining in a 
conversation via Zoom or Slack. Workforce-analytics software can help identify those distractions. 
Figure 5.12 shows a dashboard created by ActivTrak that breaks activities into focused activities, 
collaborative activities, and multitasking activities for every hour of the workday. Systems analysts 
can ask “What time of day are employees most productive versus least productive?” or “Are the 
workers online and engaged during critical business hours or do we need to adjust our staffing 
model?” A systems analyst or manager can find this useful in increasing future productivity. Their 
goal is to improve performance while creating a healthy work environment.
Comparing the Performance of Teams
Workforce analytics can clearly demonstrate the performance difference between two teams.  
A systems analyst may ask questions such as: “How does one team’s data compare to another 
team’s data?” or “How do our most productive members work, and can we model their behavior 
for the benefit of other members?”
FIGURE 5.12
This ActivTrak dashboard shows focused, collaboration, and multitasking hours per day. (Images courtesy of ActivTrak, 2022)


===== BOOK PAGE 158 =====

158    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
By viewing the teams side by side (see Figure 5.13), it is possible to see how teams can 
improve. Dashboards like this can hold a significant amount of data for comparison purposes. 
This dashboard looks at team performance, individual performance of selected team members, 
top categories of apps, top activities and apps, and the time spent on average. A manager can use 
this information to coach selected teams.
In summary, workforce analytics has become valuable for managers and systems analysts 
who want to understand what happens in a normal workday and who want to ensure that workers 
are in the right place performing the right tasks. They may want to improve work balance or assess 
team performance. They may want to identify bottlenecks and suggest improvements. Analysts 
may also want to determine which apps are being used, which are redundant, and what apps can 
be acquired in order to improve performance.
OBSERVING A DECISION MAKER’S BEHAVIOR
Observing decision makers—their physical environment and their interaction with their physical, 
ergonomic environment—is an important, unobtrusive method a systems analyst may use to 
gain insight into what is actually done, not just what is documented or explained. In addition, 
through observation of the decision maker, an analyst can see firsthand the relationships that exist 
between decision makers and other members of the organization. Observation of decision makers’ 
interactions with technologies also reveals important clues regarding HCI concerns, such as how 
well the system fits with the user.
FIGURE 5.13
Workforce analytics can be used to compare teams in an organization. (Images courtesy of ActivTrak, 2022)


===== BOOK PAGE 159 =====

CHAPTER 5  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : UnobTRUsIvE  METHods     159
Observing a Typical Manager’s Decision-Making Activities
Managers’ workdays have been described as a series of interruptions punctuated by short bursts of 
work. In other words, pinning down what a manager “does” is a slippery proposition, even under the 
best of circumstances. A systems analyst can grasp how managers characterize their work by using 
interactive interviews and questionnaires. Observation, however, allows the analyst to see firsthand 
how managers gather, process, share, and use information and technology to get work done.
Although it is possible to describe and document how managers make decisions using boxes 
and arrows, we are primarily describing humans and their activities. Therefore, we suggest that 
systems analysts use a more humanistic approach to describe what managers do. This method 
is called the analyst’s playscript. With this technique, the “actor” is the decision maker who is 
observed “acting” or making decisions. When you set up a playscript, you list the actor in the 
left-hand column and all of their actions in the right-hand column, as shown in Figure 5.14. All 
activities are recorded with action verbs; for example, a decision maker would be described as 
“talking,” “sampling,” “corresponding,” and “deciding.”
Using a playscript is an organized and systematic approach that demands that the analyst 
be able to understand and articulate the action taken by each observed decision maker. This 
approach eventually assists the systems analyst in determining what information is required for 
FIGURE 5.14
A sample page from an analyst’s 
playscript describing decision 
making.
Playscript
Analysis
Company:
Analyst:
Scenario:
Date:
Solid Steel Shelving Quality Assurance
L. Bracket 1/3/2023
Quality Assurance Asks shop ﬂoor supervisor for the day’s
Manager production report
Shop Floor Prints out daily computerized production
Supervisor report
Discusses recurring problems in production
runs with quality assurance (QA) manager
Quality Assurance Reads production report
Manager
Compares current report with other reports
from the same week
Inputs data from daily production run into
QA model on computer
Observes onscreen results of QA model
Calls steel suppliers to discuss deviations
from quality standards
Shop Floor Attends meeting on new quality speciﬁcations
Supervisor with quality assurance manager and vice
president of production
Quality Assurance Drafts letter to inform suppliers on new
Manager quality speciﬁcations agreed on in meeting
Sends draft to vice president via email
Vice President of Reads drafted letter
Production
Returns corrections and comments via email
Quality Assurance Reads corrected letter on email
Manager
Rewrites letter to reﬂect changes
Decision Maker (Actor) Information-Related Activity (Script)


===== BOOK PAGE 160 =====

160    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
major or frequent decisions made by the observed people. For instance, from the quality assurance 
manager example in the playscript, it is clear that even though this decision maker is on the 
middle management level, the person requires a fair amount of external information to perform 
the required activities of this specific job.
OBSERVING THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Observing the activities of decision makers is just one way to assess their information requirements. 
Observing the physical environment where decision makers work also reveals much about their 
human information requirements. Most often, such observation means systematically examining 
the offices of decision makers because offices constitute their primary workplace. Decision makers 
influence and are in turn influenced by, their physical environments and by their interactions with 
the technology that take place there. Many HCI concerns can be identified through structured 
observation and confirmed using other techniques, such as interviews, questionnaires, or process 
and task mining.
Structured Observation of the Environment
Film critics sometimes use a structured form of criticism called mise-en-scène analysis to 
systematically assess what is in a single shot of the film. They look at editing, camera angle, set 
decor, and the actors and their costumes to find out whether they are shaping the meaning of the 
film as intended by the director. Sometimes the film’s mise-en-scène will contradict what is said 
in the dialogue. For information requirements analysis, a systems analyst can take on a role similar 
to that of the film critic. It often is possible to observe the particulars of the surroundings that 
will confirm or negate the organizational narrative (also called stories or dialogue) that is found 
through interviews or questionnaires.
With the advent of lengthy meetings and news reports provided via Zoom from one’s dwelling 
due to the COVID-19 pandemic, an entire Twitter account called Room Rater, a humorous website, 
emerged to provide a scaled ranking from 1 to 10 of people’s video-conferencing backgrounds and 
what they meant. Observational skills became the pathway to some fun. Observers even offered 
FIGURE 5.15
Seven concrete observable ele-
ments of STROBE and examples 
of questions an analyst may want 
to ask.
Ofﬁce location
Who has the corner ofﬁce? Are the key
decision makers dispersed over separate
ﬂoors?
Desk placement
Does the placement of the desk encourage
communication? Does the placement
demonstrate power?
Stationary equipment
Does the decision maker prefer to gather
and store information personally? Is the
storage area large or small?
Props
Is there evidence that the decision maker
uses a PC, smartphone, or tablet computer
in the ofﬁce?
External information sources
Ofﬁce lighting and color
Clothing worn by decision makers
Does the decision maker get much
information from external sources such as
trade journals or the Web?
Is the lighting set up to do detailed work or
more appropriate for casual communication?
Are the colors warm and inviting?
Does the decision maker show power by
wearing authoritative clothing? Are employees
required to wear uniforms?
Questions an Analyst Might InvestigateObservable Element


===== BOOK PAGE 161 =====

CHAPTER 5  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : UnobTRUsIvE  METHods     161
suggestions for “improvements,” such as including artwork or a plant in one’s background to 
improve their score.
The method we recommend for observation is called STRuctured OBservation of the 
Environment, referred to as STROBE. Successful application of STROBE requires that an analyst 
explicitly observe seven concrete elements commonly found in offices. The seven observable 
elements and some key questions that may arise are listed in Figure 5.15. These elements can 
reveal much about the way a decision maker gathers, processes, stores, and shares information, 
as well as information about the decision maker’s credibility in the workplace.
Through the use of STROBE, a systems analyst can gain a better understanding of how man-
agers gather, process, store, and use information. A summary of the characteristics exhibited by 
decision makers and the corresponding observable elements is shown in Figure 5.16.
Collecting data unobtrusively seems easy until one realizes that 
all the data collected must be organized, stored, and retrieved for 
analysis. A very helpful app for Macs is DEVONthink Pro, where a 
systems analyst can collect all types of data from Microsoft Office 
files, photos, music, RSS feeds, and other snippets of information. 
The analyst can accumulate these items into a global mailbox, then 
organize, group, and tag this information. DEVONthink Pro can also 
keep track of web pages, images, emails, and PDFs. A built-in OCR 
reader helps input pages directly. It also has a built-in web browser 
and allows searches using multiple search engines. A document can 
belong to many groups. This is accomplished by creating replicants, 
which are simple pointers to an original file, so the analyst doesn’t 
need to store multiple copies of the document. 
When it is time to access the information, DEVONthink Pro 
can help a systems analyst search, classify, and show relationships 
among items with the help of built-in artificial intelligence, moving 
items to groups the item best fits. DEVONthink Pro doesn’t help an 
analyst determine the sample size or keep track of errors, but it does 
help the analyst collect, store, retrieve, use, and share the informa-
tion gathered in new and unexpected ways.
MAC APPEAL
FIGURE 5. MAC
DEVONthink Pro is a useful app to collect and retrieve information on Macs. (Screenshot from DEVONthink Pro. 
Copyright © by DEVONtechnologies. Reprinted by permission.)


===== BOOK PAGE 162 =====

162    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
FIGURE 5.16 
A summary of decision maker 
characteristics that correspond to 
observable elements in the physi-
cal environment.
Gathers information informally
Seeks extraorganization information
Processes data personally
Stores information personally
Exercises power in decision making
Exhibits credibility in decision making
Shares information with others
Warm, incandescent lighting and colors
Trade journals present in ofﬁce
PCs, or tablet computers present in ofﬁce
Equipment/ﬁles present in ofﬁce
Desk placed for power
Wears authoritative clothing
Ofﬁce easily accessible
Corresponding Elements
in the Physical EnvironmentCharacteristics of Decision Makers
FIGURE 5.17 
An anecdotal list with symbols for 
use in applying STROBE.
Anecdotal List with Symbols for Applying STROBE
Narrative Portrayed by
Organization Members
Oﬃce Location
and Equipment
Oﬃce Lighting,
Color, and Graphics
Clothing of the
Decision Maker
Key
Conﬁrm the narrative
Negate or reverse the narrative
Cue to look further
Modify the narrative
Supplement the narrative
Information is readily
ﬂowing on all levels.
Adams says, “I ﬁgure out
the percentages myself.”
Vinnie says, “I like to read
up on these things.”
Ed says, “The right hand
doesn’t always know what
the left hand is doing.”
Adams says, “Our company
doesn’t change much.”
The operations staﬀ
works all night sometimes.
Vinnie says, “We do things
the way Mr . Adams wants to.”
Julie says, “Stanley doesn’t
seem to care sometimes.”


===== BOOK PAGE 163 =====

CHAPTER 5  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : UnobTRUsIvE  METHods     163
Applying STROBE
One way to implement STROBE is through the use of an anecdotal checklist with meaningful 
shorthand symbols. This approach to STROBE was useful in ascertaining the information 
requirements for four key decision makers in a franchise clothing store.
In Figure 5.17, the system analysts used five shorthand symbols to evaluate how observation 
of the STROBE elements compared with the organization narrative generated through interviews. 
The five symbols are as follows:
1. A check mark means the narrative is confirmed.
2. An “X” means the narrative is reversed.
3. An oval or eye-shaped symbol serves as a cue for the systems analyst to look further.
4. A square means observation of the STROBE elements modifies the narrative.
5. A circle means the narrative is supplemented by what is observed.
When STROBE is implemented in this manner, the analyst first writes down key organizational 
themes growing out of interviews. Then they observe and record the elements of STROBE. The 
analyst then compares the narrative and observations and uses one of the five appropriate symbols 
to characterize the relationship. The analyst thus creates a table that first documents and then aids 
in the analysis of observations.
Summary
This chapter has covered unobtrusive methods for information gathering, including sampling, investigation of 
quantitative and qualitative data in current and archived forms, process and task mining, workplace analytics, 
and observation of the decision maker’s activities through the use of the analyst’s playscript, as well as obser-
vation of the decision maker’s physical environment (in person or virtually) through the use of STROBE.
The process of systematically selecting representative elements of a population is called sampling. The 
purpose of sampling is to select and study documents such as emails, invoices, sales reports, and memos, 
or perhaps to select and interview, give surveys to, or observe members of the organization. Sampling can 
reduce cost, speed data gathering, potentially make the study more effective, and possibly reduce the bias 
in the study.
A systems analyst must follow four steps in designing a good sample: (1) determine the population 
itself, (2) determine the type of sample, (3) calculate the sample size, and (4) plan the data that need to be 
collected or described.
The types of samples useful to a systems analyst are convenience samples, purposive samples, simple 
random samples, and complex random samples. The last type includes the subcategories of systematic 
sampling and stratified sampling. There are several guidelines to follow when determining sample size.
Systems analysts need to investigate current and archival data and forms that reveal where the 
organization has been and where its members believe it is going. Text analytics uses software to examine 
unstructured, qualitative data from blogs, wikis, social media sites, and other online customer interactions 
to support decision makers in interpreting qualitative material.
Both quantitative and qualitative documents need to be analyzed. Because documents are persuasive 
messages, it must be recognized that changing them might well change the organization.
Analysts can use process mining to automatically and unobtrusively scan processes found through APIs 
in enterprise software products such as SAP, Salesforce, Oracle, and so on and identify where problems 
may exist. These enterprise applications record all activities, which are the data used in process mining. 
Four steps to process mining (Uipath.com) include (1) Discover, (2) Optimize/Automate, (3) Monitor, and  
(4) Act. Task mining uses desktop capture to automatically see what individuals are doing and figure out 
what processes can be improved.
Analysts can use workforce analytics to gather data unobtrusively and automatically about workloads 
and performance in order to answer questions such as, Are the right workers in the right place? Is workload 
balanced among staff? How do workers’ and teams’ performances compare? What bottlenecks are occurring 
in workflows? Which apps are used more than others? And which apps deliver more productivity to the team?
Analysts use observation as an information-gathering technique. Through observation, they gain insight 
into what is actually done as users interact with information technology. One way to describe how decision 
makers behave is to use an analyst’s playscript that documents each of the major players’ activities.
In addition to observing a decision maker’s behavior, a systems analyst should observe the decision 
maker’s surroundings for important clues as to how well the system fits the user. One method is STROBE. 
A systems analyst uses STROBE in the same way that a film critic uses a method called mise-en-scène 
analysis to analyze a shot in a film.


===== BOOK PAGE 164 =====

164    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
Review Questions
1. Define what is meant by sampling.
2. List four reasons a systems analyst would want to sample data or select representative people to interview.
3. What are the four steps to follow to design a good sample?
4. List the three approaches to complex random sampling.
5. Define what is meant by stratification of samples.
6. What effect on sample size does using a greater confidence level have when sampling attribute data?
7. What is the overriding variable that determines how many people a systems analyst should interview 
in depth?
8. What is text analytics?
9. What are the sources of big data for text analytics that an analyst might use? List them.
10. What is process mining?
11. What sources of data are used in process mining?
12. List four steps to process mining.
13. What is task mining?
14. What sources of data are used in task mining?
15. What are workforce analytics?
16. What five questions about individuals or teams can use of workforce analytics answer?
17. What information about a decision maker does an analyst seek to gain from observation?
18. List five steps to help an analyst observe a decision maker’s typical activities.
19. In the technique known as the analyst’s playscript, who is the actor?
20. In an analyst’s playscript, what information about managers is recorded in the right-hand column?
21. Noting that the idea of STROBE originally came from the world of film, what does the systems ana-
lyst’s role resemble?
22. List the seven concrete elements of a decision maker’s physical environment that a systems analyst 
can observe using STROBE.
Problems
1. Leigh Mutchler is concerned that too many forms are being filled out incorrectly. She feels that about 
8 percent of all the forms have errors.
a. How large a sample size should Leigh use to be 99 percent certain the interval estimate will be 
within + or 0.02?
b. How large a sample size should Leigh use to be 90 percent certain the interval estimate will be 
within 0.02?
c. Explain the difference between parts a and b in words.
d. Suppose Leigh will accept a confidence level of 95 percent with an interval level within 0.02. 
What will the sample size of forms be now?
Keywords and Phrases
analyst’s playscript
business-to-business (B2B) ecommerce
business-to-consumer (B2C) ecommerce
cluster sampling
complex random sample
confidence level
convenience sample
process mining
purposive sample
qualitative documents
quantitative documents
sampling
simple random sample
stratified sampling
STROBE
systematic sampling
task mining
text analytics
workforce analytics
A systems analyst can observe and interpret several concrete elements in the decision maker’s 
environment. These elements include (1) office location, (2) placement of the decision maker’s desk,  
(3) stationary office equipment, (4) props such as handheld devices and PCs, (5) external information sources 
such as trade journals and use of the web, (6) office lighting and color, and (7) clothing worn by the decision 
maker. A systems analyst can use STROBE to gain a better understanding of how decision makers actually 
gather, process, store, and share information in order to get their work done.


===== BOOK PAGE 165 =====

CHAPTER 5  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : UnobTRUsIvE  METHods     165
2. “I see that you have quite a few papers there. What all do you have in there?” asks Ali Vedadi, head 
of the management information systems task force that is the liaison group between your system’s 
group and Sawder’s Furniture Company. You are shuffling a large bundle of papers as you prepare to 
leave the building.
“Well, I’ve got some financial statements, production reports from the last six months, and some 
performance reports that Merrill gave me that cover goals and work performance over the last six 
months,” you reply as some of the papers fall to the floor. “Why do you ask?”
Ali takes the papers from you and puts them on the nearest desk. He answers, “Because you 
don’t need all this junk. You’re here to do one thing, and that’s talk to us, the users. Bet you can’t read 
one thing in there that’ll make a difference.”
a. The only way to convince Ali of the importance of each document is to tell him what you are 
looking for in each one. In a paragraph, explain what each kind of document contributes to a 
systems analyst’s understanding of the business.
b. While you are speaking with Ali, you realize that you actually need other quantitative documents 
as well. List any you are missing.
3. You’ve sampled the email messages that have been sent to several middle managers of Sawder’s 
Furniture Company, which ships build-your-own particleboard furniture across the United States. 
Here is one that repeats a message found in several other memos:
To: Sid, Ernie, Carl
From: Imogene
Re: Computer/printer supplies
Date: November 10, 2022
It has come to my attention that I have been waging a war against requests for computer and 
printer supplies (ink cartridges, toner, paper, and so on) that are all out of proportion to what has 
been negotiated for in the current budget. Because we’re all good soldiers here, I hope you will take 
whatever our supply sergeant says is standard issue. Please, no “midnight requisitioning*” to make 
up for shortages. Thanks for being Gl in this regard; it makes the battle easier for us all.
a. What metaphor(s) is (are) being used? List the predominant metaphor and other phrases that play 
on that theme. *(Note that “midnight requisitioning” is military slang for the unauthorized taking 
of supplies at night from a crew for use in one’s own unit – a form of petty thievery.)
b. If you found repeated evidence of this idea in other email messages, what interpretation would 
you have? Use a paragraph to explain.
c. In a paragraph, describe how the people in your systems analysis group can use the information 
from the email messages to shape their systems project for Sawder’s.
d. In interviews with Sid, Ernie, and Carl, there has been no mention of problems with obtaining 
enough computer and printer supplies. In a paragraph, discuss why such problems may not come 
up in interviews and discuss the value of examining email messages and other memos in addition 
to interviewing.
4. “Here’s the main policy manual we’ve put together over the years for system users,” says Botong 
Xue, as he blows the dust off the manual and hands it to you. Botong is a document keeper for 
the systems department of Prechter and Gumbel, a large manufacturer of health and beauty aids. 
“Everything any user of any part of the system needs to know is in what I call the Blue Book. I mean, 
it’s chockablock with policies. It’s so big that I’m the only one with a complete copy. It costs too 
much to reproduce it.” You thank Botong and lug the heavy volume with you. When you read through 
it, you are astonished at what it contains. Most pages begin with a message such as: “This page 
supersedes page 23.1 in manual V ol. II. Discard previous inserts; do not use.”
a. List your observations about the frequency of use of the Blue Book.
b. How user friendly are the updates in the manual? Write a sentence explaining your answer.
c. Write a paragraph commenting on the wisdom of having all-important policies for all systems 
users in one printed book.
d. Suggest a solution that incorporates the use of online policy manuals for some users.
e. Write a paragraph about how text analytics could help the organization do a review of the 
content of employee policies posted online. Write a second paragraph stating whether you would 
recommend this approach and state why or why not.
5. “I think I’ll be able to remember almost everything he does,” says Feng Xu. He is about to interview 
Anwuli Emem, vice president of strategic planning of Steak Your Claim, a plant-based restaurant 
chain with 130 locations specializing in serving meat alternatives in family settings. “I mean, I’ve got 
a good memory. I think it’s much more important to listen to what she says than to observe what she 
does anyway.” One of your systems analysis team members, Feng, has been talking with you about 
the desirability of writing down his observations of Anwuli’s office and activities during the interview.
a. In a paragraph, persuade Feng that listening is not enough in interviews and that observing and 
recording those observations are also important.


===== BOOK PAGE 166 =====

166    PART II  •  InfoRMATIon  REQUIREMEnTs  AnALY sIs
b. Feng seems to have accepted your idea that observation is important but still doesn’t know what 
to observe. Make a list of items and behaviors to observe, and in a sentence beside each behavior, 
indicate what information Feng should hope to gain through observation of it.
6. “We’re a progressive company, always looking to be ahead of the power curve. We’ll give anything 
a whirl if it’ll put us ahead of the competition, and that includes every one of us,” says I. B. Daring, 
an executive with Michigan Manufacturing (2M). You are interviewing him as a preliminary step in 
a systems project, one in which his subordinates have expressed interest. As you listen to I. B., you 
look around his office to see that most of the information he has stored on shelves can be classified as 
internal procedures manuals. In addition, you notice a PC on a back table of I. B.’s office. The display 
screen is covered with dust, and the manuals stacked beside the PC are still encased in their original 
shrink-wrap. Even though you know that 2M uses an intranet, no cables are visible going to or from 
I. B.’s PC. On the wall behind I. B.’s massive mahogany desk you see five framed oil portraits of 
2M’s founders, all clustered around a gold plaque bearing the corporate slogan, which states, “Make 
sure you’re right, then go ahead.”
a. What is the organizational narrative or story line as portrayed by I. B. Daring? Rephrase it in your 
own words.
b. List the elements of STROBE that you have observed during your interview with I. B.
c. Next to each element of STROBE that you have observed, write a sentence on how you would 
interpret it.
d. Construct a table with the organizational story line down the left-hand side of the page and the 
elements of STROBE across the top. Using the symbols from the “anecdotal list” application of 
STROBE, indicate the relationship between the organizational story line as portrayed by I. B. and 
each element you have observed (that is, indicate whether each element of STROBE confirms, 
reverses, causes you to look further, modifies, or supplements the narrative).
e. Based on your STROBE observations and your interview, state in a paragraph what problems 
you are able to anticipate in getting a new system approved by I. B. and others. In a sentence or 
two, discuss how your diagnosis might have been different if you had only talked to I. B. over the 
phone or had read his written comments on a systems proposal.
Group Projects
1. Assume that your group will serve as a systems analysis and design team for a project designed 
to computerize or enhance all business aspects of a 15-year-old national U.S. trucking firm called 
Maverick Transport. Maverick is a less-than-a-truckload carrier. The people in management work 
from the philosophy of just in time (JIT), in which they have created a partnership that includes 
the shipper, the receiver, and the carrier (Maverick Transport) for the purpose of transporting and 
delivering the materials required JIT for their use on the production line. Maverick maintains 626 
tractors for hauling freight and has 45,000 square feet of warehouse space and 21,000 square feet of 
office space.
a. Along with your group members, develop a list of sources of archival data that should be checked 
when analyzing the information requirements of Maverick.
b. When this list is complete, devise a sampling scheme that would permit your group to get a clear 
picture of the company without having to read each document generated in its 15-year history.
2. Assign each group member (or team of group members) to research a process-mining company, 
Celonis, UIPath, Fluxicon, or QPR Software. Each team member should report back to the group, 
writing one page (1) summarizing the features of the process-mining company they researched,  
(2) stating who the company’s target audience is (size of firm and industry, for example), (3) who 
some of their current clients are, and (4) whether they would recommend adoption of this specific 
process-mining software to supplement unobtrusive identification of system problems.
3. Arrange to visit a local organization that is expanding or otherwise enhancing its information 
systems. To allow your group to practice the various observation methods described in this chapter, 
assign either of these two methods to each team member: developing the analyst’s (1) playscript 
or (2) using STROBE. Many of these strategies can be employed during one-on-one interviews, 
whereas some require formal organizational meetings. To accomplish several objectives during 
your visit to the organization, schedule your visit at a time that allows all team members to try their 
assigned method of observation. Using multiple methods such as interviewing and observation (often 
simultaneously) is the only cost-effective way to get a true, timely picture of the organization’s 
information requirements. Alternatively, if you are working on this problem as a face-to face group in 
a school or university setting, arrange to visit one of your school or university’s departments during 
working hours and follow the instructions given above.


===== BOOK PAGE 167 =====

CHAPTER 5  •  InfoRMATIon G ATHERInG : UnobTRUsIvE  METHods     167
4. The members of your group should meet and discuss their findings after completing Group Project 
2. Were there any surprises? Did the information garnered through observation confirm, reverse, or 
negate what was learned in interviews? Were any of the findings from the observational methods 
in direct conflict with each other? Work with your group to develop a list of ways to address any 
puzzling information (for example, by doing follow-up interviews). Write down the list and share it 
with the entire group.
5. With your group, research software solutions that can help analysts keep track of a variety of data 
such as observations, surveys, and so on. (Hint: One app is Devonthink Professional Office high-
lighted in Mac Appeal in this chapter.) Allow each group member to work on their own to find a suit-
able package, noting advantages and drawbacks. Take about 20 minutes to do so. Once your research 
is completed, collaborate on creating a table of all the software found by team members. List each 
piece of software and also give advantages and drawbacks of each.
Selected Bibliography
AllActivity. (2022, January 7). The 7 best task mining tools for small businesses in 2021 [Blog post]. 
https://allactivity.com/blog/the-7-best-task-mining-tools-for-small-businesses/
Ball, A., Lewis, N., and Miller, M. A. (2022). The rise and fall of the real fur industry in the US Insider. 
https://www.businessinsider.com/rise-and-fall-fur-industry-faux-mink-2022-2
Chan, G. (2021, April 8). A room with a view: The Twitter account that spent a year staring into people’s 
homes. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2021/apr/08/a-room-with-a-view-the- 
twitter-account-that-spent-a-year-staring-into-peoples-homes
Cooper, D. R., & Schindler, P. S. (2013). Business Research Methods (12th ed.). McGraw-Hill/Irwin.
Davenport, T. H., & Spanyi, A. (2019). What process mining is, and why companies should do it. Harvard 
Business Review. https://hbr.org/2019/04/what-process-mining-is-and-why-companies-should-do-it
Edgington, T. M. (2011). Introducing text analytics as a graduate business school course. Journal of 
Information Technology Education, 10, 207–234.
Edwards, A., & Talbot, R. (1994). The hard-pressed researcher. Longman.
The Gartner Group. The Gartner Market Guide for Process Mining (2019). www.gartnergroup.com
Halper, B. F. (2008, October 14). Leximancer—concept maps for text analytics and the customer insight 
portal. fbhalper.wordpress.com/2008/10/14/leximancer-concept-maps-and-the-customer-insight- 
portal/
Kendall, J. E. (1997). Examining the relationship between computer cartoons and factors in information 
systems use, success, and failure: Visual evidence of met and unmet expectations. The DATA BASE 
for Advances in Information Systems, 28(2), 113–126.
Kendall, J. E., & Kendall, K. E. (1993). Metaphors and methodologies: Living beyond the systems 
machine. MIS Quarterly, 17(2), 149–171.
Kendall J. E., & Kendall, K. E. (1994). Metaphors and their meaning for information systems 
development. European Journal of Information Systems, 3(1), 37–47.
Kendall, K. E., & Kendall, J. E. (1981). Observing organizational environments: A systematic approach 
for information analysts. MIS Quarterly, 5(1), 43–55.
Kendall, K. E., & Kendall, J. E. (1984). STROBE: A structured approach to the observation of the 
decision-making environment. Information & Management, 7(1), 1–11.
Kendall, K. E., & Kendall, J. E. (1984). Structured observation of the decision-making environment:  
A validity and reliability assessment. Decision Sciences, 15(1), 107–118.
Markus, M. L., & Lee, A. S. (2000). Special issue on intensive research in information systems: Using 
qualitative, interpretive, and case methods to study information technology—Second installment. 
MIS Quarterly, 24(1), 1.
Schultze, U. (2000). A confessional account of an ethnography about knowledge work. MIS Quarterly, 
24(1), 3–41.
Shah, V . (2022). Connecting Local Communities and University Students Through Application of Process 
Mining: A Success Story of CMU and Celonis. Unpublished manuscript.
Shultis, R. L. (1964). “Playscript”—A new tool accountants need. NAA Bulletin, 45(12), 3–10.
Webb, E. J., Campbell, D. T., Schwartz, R. D., & Sechrest, L. (1999). Unobtrusive measures (rev. ed.). 
Sage.


===== BOOK PAGE 168 =====

168
Agile Modeling, Prototyping, 
and Scrum
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Once you have mastered the material in this chapter, you will be able to:
1 Understand the concept of prototyping and be able to identify the four main types of 
prototyping.
2 Understand agile modeling and the core values, principles, and practices that differentiate 
it from other development methodologies.
3 Grasp the concept of user stories and why they have value.
4 Appreciate Scrum as an agile method to improve development of complex projects.
5 Learn about DevOps as a cultural shift in the way to organize rapid systems development 
and operations.
6 Understand what no-code software development is and what it means to systems design.
7 Learn how Work Management Systems can be helpful in Agile Software Development.
8 Be able to compare agile modeling and structured methods and grasp the lessons learned 
from adopting agile methods.
This chapter explores the agile methodology, which is a collection of innovative, user-
centered approaches to systems development. It has become the predominant approach 
to systems development, especially when used in a hybrid approach with selected systems 
development life cycle processes. You learn the values and principles, activities, resources, 
practices, processes, and tools associated with agile methodologies. Agile approaches have 
their roots in prototyping, so this chapter begins with prototyping to provide a proper context 
for understanding, and then it takes up the agile approach later in the chapter.
User stories are casual explanations of a requested software feature expressed in the  
language of a user. They are the beginning point for a series of interactions between 
the user and the developer. Each user story should stand on its own without other user 
stories, is negotiable among the project stakeholders, and should focus on the user’s 
requirements and how they relate to business value.
Agile modeling is distinct from structured methods as a systems development 
approach that helps develop systems rapidly. Scrum is an agile method that is suitable 
for more complex systems projects. Using Scrum, a limited number of features or tasks 
are selected for completion in a sprint, typically lasting two to four weeks. The result of the 
sprint is a potentially shippable product. Once the sprint ends, the process begins again 
6
CHAPTER

