
===== BOOK PAGE 169 =====

CHAPTER 6  •  AgilE  ModEling, PR o To TyPing, And SCR uM     169
with new priorities and features to be finished in the next sprint. There are specific roles 
to play in Scrum, and there are also specific actions to take.
DevOps (derived from development and operations) is a cultural shift in the 
organization. It can create two approaches in the organization that run on parallel tracks, 
one track supports developing rapid innovative applications, and the other supports the 
maintenance and operations of those processes already in place.
No-code platforms are springing up where nonprogrammers can drag and drop 
content onto a web page or app without needing to do coding. Some advantages of 
no-code development are it’s cost-effective, easier, quicker, and one person using it can 
sometimes do the work of a team. Some disadvantages of no-code include apps and 
websites are not developed strategically when anyone can use no-code and often there is 
no documentation. No-code software development is useful in prototyping and as a tool 
in agile methods and will only increase in popularity.
Work management systems can be helpful in agile development. An example is Jira 
(https://www.atlassian.com), which allows you to create epics. An epic is a compendium 
of user stories from customers and end users. Epics can be used to organize all of the 
user stories and break down the tasks into release versions.
As implied in the video, to promote agility of the workforce, a sys-
tems team needs to be flexible and adaptable, use fresh approaches, 
ensure value for all, and nurture high-potential talent. After you 
view the video, please reflect on the following questions:
1. Develop some ways that a systems team can demonstrate its 
flexibility and adaptability when it comes to scheduling team 
members for remote versus in-person work.
2. What are some ways that a fresh approach can be introduced 
in team meetings? Think about the addition of playful ele-
ments such as humor, props, and group activities that reframe 
the atmosphere of a standard meeting.
3. What are some ways that systems teams can ensure value for 
all (for example, during meetings that are held and who is 
required to attend)?
4. Think about what it means to nurture an agile team member 
who is a high-potential talent. How can the team leader work 
to see potential talent in a new light?
SYSTEMS SCENARIO  
Creating Agility in the Workplace
Along with prototyping, this chapter explores agile modeling 
and the core values, principles, and practices that differentiate agile 
approaches from structured development methodologies. In this 
video, the concept of agility is considered in a larger framework, 
that of creating workforce agility, explored in a humorous way.  
To view the video for this scenario, 
see eText Chapter 6.
PROTOTYPING
A systems analyst presenting a prototype of an information system is keenly interested in the 
reactions of users and management to the prototype. The analyst wants to know in detail how they 
react to working with the prototype and how good the fit is between their needs and the prototyped 
features of the system. Reactions are gathered through observation, interviews, and feedback 
sheets (possibly questionnaires) designed to elicit each person’s opinion about the prototype as 
they interact with it.
Seven Dimensions/Boclips


===== BOOK PAGE 170 =====

170    PART ii •  inFoRMATion  REQuiREMEnTS AnAly SiS
Information gathered in the prototyping phase allows an analyst to set priorities and redirect 
plans inexpensively, with minimal disruption. Therefore, prototyping and planning go hand 
in hand.
Kinds of Prototypes
The word prototype is used in many ways. Rather than attempt to synthesize all these uses into 
one definition or try to mandate one correct approach to the somewhat controversial topic of 
prototyping, we illustrate how each of several conceptions of prototyping may be usefully applied 
in a particular situation, as shown in Figure 6.1.
Patched-Up Prototype. The first kind of prototyping has to do with constructing a system that 
works but is patched up or patched together, called a patched-up prototype. In engineering, 
this approach is referred to as breadboarding: creating a patched-together, working model of an 
(otherwise microscopic) integrated circuit.
An example in information systems is a working model that has all the necessary features but 
is inefficient. In this instance of prototyping, users can interact with the system and get accustomed 
to the interface and the types of output available. The retrieval and storage of information may 
be inefficient, however, because applications were written rapidly, with the objective of being 
workable rather than efficient.
Nonoperational Prototype. The second conception of a prototype is that of a nonworking scale 
model that is set up to test certain aspects of the design, called a nonoperational prototype. An 
example of this approach is a full-scale model of an automobile that is used in wind tunnel tests. 
The size and shape of the auto are precise, but the car is not operational. In this case, only features 
of the automobile that are essential to wind tunnel testing are included.
A nonworking scale model of an information system might be produced when the coding 
required by the applications is too extensive to prototype but when a useful idea of the system 
can be gained through the prototyping of the input and output only. In this instance, processing, 
FIGURE 6.1
Four kinds of prototypes.
Feature 3
Feature 1
Feature 5
Selected Features Prototype
Nonoperational PrototypePatched-Up Prototype
First-of-a-Series Prototype
Facility 2
Facility 1
Input Process Output
Facility 3


===== BOOK PAGE 171 =====

CHAPTER 6  •  AgilE  ModEling, PR o To TyPing, And SCR uM     171
because of undue cost and time, would not be prototyped. Users could still make decisions on the 
utility of the system, based on their use of prototyped input and output.
First-of-a-Series Prototype. A third conception of prototyping involves creating a first full-
scale model of a system, often called a first-of-a-series prototype or pilot. An example is 
prototyping the first airplane of a series and then seeing whether it flies before building a second. 
The prototype is completely operational and is a realization of what the designer hopes will be a 
series of airplanes with identical features.
This type of prototyping is useful when many installations of the same information system 
are planned. The full-scale working model allows users to experience realistic interaction with 
the new system, but it minimizes the cost of overcoming any problems it presents. For example, 
when a retail grocery chain intends to use blockchain (see Chapter 13) to check in suppliers’ 
shipments in a number of outlets, a full-scale implementation might be done in one store so users 
could work through any problems before blockchain is implemented as part of the supply chain 
in all the others.
Selected-Features Prototype. A fourth conception of prototyping concerns building an 
operational model that includes some, but not all, of the features that the final system will 
have, called a selected-features prototype. An analogy would be a new brick-and-mortar retail 
shopping mall that opens before the construction of all shops is complete.
When prototyping information systems in this way, some, but not all, essential features are 
included. For example, users may view a system menu on a screen that lists six features: add a 
record, update a record, delete a record, search a record for a key word, list a record, or scan a 
record. In the prototyped system, however, only three of the six may be available for use, so that 
the user may add a record (feature 1), delete a record (feature 3), and list a record (feature 5). 
User feedback can help analysts understand what is working and what isn’t. It also can help with 
suggestions on what features to add next.
When this kind of prototyping is done, the system is accomplished in modules so prototyped 
features evaluated by users as successful can be incorporated into the larger, final system without 
undertaking immense work in interfacing. Prototypes done in this manner are part of the actual 
system. They are not just mock-ups, as in nonoperational prototyping. Unless otherwise mentioned, 
all further references to prototyping in this chapter refer to selected features prototypes.
As you formulate a response to Paul, you think back over 
the few weeks you’ve worked with Pyramid. You think that the 
business problems its information system must resolve are very 
straightforward. You also know that the people in the company are 
on a limited budget and cannot afford to spend like kings. Actually, 
the entire project is quite small.
Ceil, building on what Paul has said, tells you, “We don’t mean 
to be too wrapped up with it, but we feel prototyping represents the 
new world. And that’s where we all want to be. We know we need 
a prototype. Have we convinced you?”
Based on Paul’s and Ceil’s enthusiasm for prototyping and what 
you know about Pyramid’s needs, would you support construction 
of a prototype? Why or why not? Formulate your decision and 
response in a letter to Paul LeGon and Ceil Toom. Present a 
justification for your decision based on overall criteria that should 
be met to justify prototyping.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 6.1 
Is Prototyping King?
“As you know, we’re an enthusiastic group. We’re not a 
dynasty yet, but we’re working on it,” Paul LeGon tells you. At 24 
years of age, Paul (introduced in Consulting Opportunity 2.3) is the 
“boy king” of Pyramid, Inc., a small but successful independent 
publishing firm that specializes in paperback books outside of the 
publishing mainstream. As a systems analyst, you have been hired 
by Pyramid to help develop a computerized warehouse inventory 
and distribution information system.
“We’re hiring lots of workers,” Paul continues, as if to convince 
you of the vastness of Pyramid’s undertaking. “And we feel Pyramid 
is positioned perfectly as far as our markets in the north, south, east, 
and west are concerned.”
“My assistant, Ceil Toom, and I have been working away, think-
ing about the new system. And we’ve concluded that what we really 
need is a prototype. As a matter of fact, we’ve tunneled through a lot of 
material. Our fascination with the whole idea has really pyramided.”


===== BOOK PAGE 172 =====

172    PART ii •  inFoRMATion  REQuiREMEnTS AnAly SiS
The Users’ Role in Prototyping
The users’ role in prototyping can be summed up in two words: honest involvement. Without 
user involvement with prototyping, there is little reason to prototype. The precise behaviors 
necessary for interacting with a prototype can vary, but the user is pivotal to the prototyping 
process. Realizing the importance of the user to the success of the process, the members of a 
systems analysis team must encourage and welcome input and guard against their own natural 
resistance to changing the prototype.
To facilitate the prototyping process, the analyst must clearly communicate the purposes 
of prototyping to users, along with the idea that prototyping is valuable only when users are 
meaningfully involved. Some of the variables you should observe include user reactions to the 
prototype, user suggestions for changing or expanding the prototype, any innovations (such as 
suggestions for using the system in completely new ways), and any revision plans that might 
arise from working with the users. Although users will be asked to articulate suggestions and 
innovations for the prototype, in the end it is the analyst’s responsibility to weigh this feedback 
and translate it into workable changes where necessary.
AGILE MODELING
Agile methods are a collection of innovative, user-centered approaches to systems development. 
You learn the values and principles, activities, resources, practices, processes, and tools associated 
with agile methodologies in the upcoming sections. Agile methods have been credited with many 
successful systems development projects and, in numerous cases, have rescued companies from 
a failing system designed using a structured methodology.
Values and Principles of Agile Modeling
The agile approach is not based just on results. It is based on values, principles, and practices. 
Essential to agile programming are stated values and principles that create the context for 
collaboration among programmers and customers. Agile analysts must adhere to the following 
values and principles as developed by Beck (2000) in his work on agile modeling, which he called 
“extreme programming,” or “XP.”
Four Values of Agile Modeling. Four values of agile modeling create an environment in which 
both developers and businesses can adequately be served. Because there is often tension between 
what developers do in the short term and what is commercially desirable in the long term, it is 
important that analysts knowingly espouse values that will form a basis for acting together on a 
software project. The four values are communication, simplicity, feedback, and courage, as shown 
in Figure 6.2.
FIGURE 6.2
Values are crucial to the agile 
approach.
Agile Values
Feedback
SimplicityCommunication
Courage


===== BOOK PAGE 173 =====

CHAPTER 6  •  AgilE  ModEling, PR o To TyPing, And SCR uM     173
Let’s begin with communication. Every human endeavor is fraught with possibilities for 
miscommunication. Systems projects that require constant updating and technical design are 
especially prone to such errors. Add to this tight project deadlines, specialized jargon, and lack 
of opportunities to interact with employess outside of your own team, and you have the potential 
for some serious communication problems. Projects can be delayed, the wrong problem can be 
solved, coders may bring up problems to managers who don’t understand the technical nuances, 
people may leave or join the project in midstream without proper updates, and so the litany goes.
Typical agile practices such as pair programming (where two coders collaborate, described 
later in the chapter), tasks estimation, and unit testing rely heavily on good communication. 
Problems are fixed rapidly, holes are closed, and weak thinking is quickly strengthened through 
interaction with others on the team.
A second value of the agile approach is simplicity. When we are working on a software 
development project, our first inclination is to become overwhelmed with the complexity and bigness 
of the task. However, you cannot run until you know how to walk, nor walk until you know how to 
stand. Simplicity for software development means beginning with the simplest possible thing we 
can do.
The agile value simplicity asks us to do the simplest thing today, with the understanding 
that it might have to be changed a little tomorrow. This requires a clear focus on the goals of the 
project and really is a basic value.
Feedback is the third basic value that is important when taking an extreme programming 
approach. When you think of feedback in this context, it is good to consider that feedback is 
wrapped up with the concept of time. Good, concrete feedback that is useful to the programmer, 
analyst, and customer can occur within seconds, minutes, days, weeks, or months, depending on 
what is needed, who is communicating, and what will be done with the feedback. A fellow coder 
may hand you a test case that breaks the code you wrote only hours before, but that feedback is 
almost priceless in terms of being able to change what is not working before it is accepted and 
further embedded in the system.
Feedback occurs when customers create functional tests for all the stories that coders have 
subsequently implemented. (See more on user stories later in this chapter.) Critical feedback 
about the schedule comes from customers who compare the goal of the plan to the progress that 
has been made. Feedback helps coders make adjustments and lets the business start experiencing 
very early on what the new system will be like once it is fully functional.
Courage is the fourth value in agile programming. Courage has to do with the level of trust 
and comfort that must exist in a development team. It means not being afraid to throw out an 
afternoon or a day of coding and begin again if all is not right. It means being able to stay in touch 
with one’s instincts (and test results) concerning what is working and what is not.
Courage also means responding to concrete feedback, acting on your teammates’ hunches 
when they believe that they have a simpler, better way to accomplish a goal. Courage is a high-
risk, high-reward value that encourages experimentation that can take the team to its goal more 
rapidly, in an innovative way. Courage means that you and your teammates trust each other and 
your customers enough to act in ways that will continuously improve what is being done on 
the project, even if that requires throwing out code, rethinking solutions, or further simplifying 
approaches. Courage also implies that you, as a systems analyst, eagerly apply the practices of 
the agile approach.
Analysts can best reflect all four values through an attitude of humility. Historically, computer 
software was developed by experts who often thought they knew how to run a business better than 
the local customers who were the true domain experts. Computer experts were often referred to 
as “gurus.” Some of the gurus displayed large egos and insisted on their infallibility, even when 
customers did not believe it. Many gurus lacked the virtue of humility.
However, maintaining a humble attitude during systems development is critical. You must 
continually embrace the idea that if the user is expressing a difficulty, then that difficulty must be 
addressed. It cannot be ignored. Agile modelers are systems analysts who make suggestions and 
voice opinions, but never insist that they are right 100 percent of the time. Agile modelers possess 
the self-confidence to allow their customers to question, critique, and sometimes complain about 
the system under development. Analysts learn from their customers, most of whom have been in 
business a long time.


===== BOOK PAGE 174 =====

174    PART ii •  inFoRMATion  REQuiREMEnTS AnAly SiS
The Basic Principles of Agile Modeling. In a perfect world, customers and a software development 
team would see eye to eye, and communication would not be necessary. We would all agree at 
all times. But we know that the ideal world doesn’t exist. So how can we bring our software 
development projects closer to the ideal? Part of why this will not happen is that thus far we are 
trying to operate on a vague system of shared values. They’re a good beginning, but they are not 
operationalized to the point at which we can measure our success in any meaningful way. So, 
we work to derive the basic principles that can help us check whether what we are doing in our 
software project is actually measuring up to the values that we share.
Agile principles are the reflections and specifications of agile values. They serve as guidelines 
for developers to follow when developing systems. They also serve to set agile methodologies 
apart from the more traditional plan-driven methodologies such as the systems development life 
cycle (SDLC) or object-oriented methodologies.
Agile principles were first described by Beck (2000) and have evolved ever since. These 
principles can be expressed in a series of sayings:
1. Satisfy the customer through delivery of working software.
2. Embrace change, even if introduced late in development.
3. Continue to deliver functioning software incrementally and frequently.
4. Encourage customers and analysts to work together daily.
5. Trust motivated individuals to get the job done.
6. Promote face-to-face conversation.
7. Concentrate on getting software to work.
8. Encourage continuous, regular, and sustainable development.
9. Adopt agility with attention to mindful design.
10. Support self-organizing teams.
11. Provide rapid feedback.
12. Encourage quality.
13. Review and adjust behavior occasionally.
14. Adopt simplicity.
Often you will hear agile developers communicate their point through sayings like these 
or even simpler phrases, such as “model with a purpose,” “software is your primary goal,” and 
“travel light,” a way of saying a little documentation is good enough. Listen to these carefully. 
Catchy phrases are easy to understand, easy to memorize, and easy to repeat. They are very 
effective. These sayings (some call them proverbs) are discussed in detail in Chapter 16.
Activities, Resources, and Practices of Agile Modeling
Agile modeling involves several activities that need to be completed during the agile development 
process. This section discusses these activities, the resources, and the practices that are unique to 
the agile approach.
Four Basic Activities of Agile Development. Agile methods use four basic activities of develop-
ment: coding, testing, listening, and designing. An agile analyst needs to identify the amount of effort 
that will go into each activity and balance that with the resources needed to complete the project.
Coding is designated as the one activity that it is not possible to do without. Beck (2000) 
states that the most valuable thing we receive from code is “learning.” The process is basically 
this: have a thought, code it, test it, and see whether the thought was a logical one. Code also can 
be used to communicate ideas that would otherwise remain fuzzy or unshaped. When others see 
your code, they may get a new thought (Beck, 2000).
Testing is the second basic activity of development. The agile approach views automated tests 
as critical. The agile approach advocates writing tests to check coding, functionality, performance, 
and conformance. Agile modeling relies on automated tests, and large libraries of tests exist for 
most programming languages. These tests need to be updated as necessary during the progress 
of the project.
There are both long-term and short-term reasons for testing. Testing in the short term provides 
you with extreme confidence in what you are building. If tests run perfectly, you can continue 
with renewed confidence. In the long term, testing keeps a system alive and allows you to make 
changes longer than would be possible if no tests were written or run.


===== BOOK PAGE 175 =====

CHAPTER 6  •  AgilE  ModEling, PR o To TyPing, And SCR uM     175
basic information and let the customer press on a tab to access 
more information, or to be as complete as possible on one page? 
If I use the linking method, then I could fit more items on the 
screen . . . but it might be too orderly. I do know that customers 
like the look and feel of a sale in which merchandise is kind of 
jumbled together.”
Jim continues Elaine’s line of thought, saying, “Yeah, I wonder 
how customers want the information organized. Have you actually 
observed them using the web? I mean, do they look for running 
shoes when they buy a T-shirt? If so, should running shoes appear 
on the T-shirt page or be linked in some way?”
Elaine comments, “Those are my questions too. Then I wonder 
if we should just try this approach for teens’ clothing before we 
implement it for adults’ clothing. What if approaches to shopping 
online differ greatly by age?
As a third member of the World’s Trend website development 
group, respond in a brief written report to Jim and Elaine about 
whether you should use a prototype to elicit recommendations from 
potential customers about the proposed clearance website. What 
type of prototype is appropriate? Consider each form of prototype 
and explain why each type would apply (or would not apply) to this 
problem. Devote a paragraph to each explanation.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 6.2 
Clearing the Way for Customer Links
W orld’s Trend (see Chapter 7 for a detailed corporate descrip-
tion) is building a website solely to sell clearance merchandise 
usually sold through the company’s main website and through its 
catalog operation. As a newly hired web consultant, Jim Lee, Jr. 
finds himself in a very cold, wintry city, fighting his way through 
several inches of snow to meet with one of the systems team mem-
bers, Elaine Hulitt, at World’s Trend headquarters.
Elaine welcomes Jim, saying, “At least the weather doesn’t 
seem to affect our web sales! They’re brisk no matter what.” Jim 
groans appreciatively at her weak attempt at humor, smiles, and 
says, “I gathered from your email last week that you are trying to 
determine the type of information that needs to be displayed on your 
clearance website.”
Elaine replies, “Yes, I’m trying to get it organized in the 
best possible way. Our customers are all so busy. I know pho-
tos of all our merchandise can take a long time to load if a 
customer is accessing the web via their mobile phone.” Elaine 
continues, saying, “Jim, I’m not even that concerned about how 
to design our clearance site at this time. I am worried, though, 
about how much information we need to include on a page. For 
example, when items are on clearance, not all colors and sizes 
are available. Which do you think is better, to include some 
The third basic activity of development is listening. In Chapter 4, we learned about the 
importance of listening during interviews. In the agile approach, listening is done in the extreme. 
Developers use active listening to hear their programming partner. In agile modeling, there is less 
reliance on formal, written communication, so listening becomes a paramount skill.
A developer also uses active listening with the customer. Developers assume that they know 
nothing about the business they are helping, and so they must listen carefully to businesspeople to 
get answers to their questions. A developer needs to come to an understanding of what effective 
listening is. If you don’t listen, you will not know what you should code or what you should test.
The fourth basic activity in development is designing, which is a way of creating a structure 
to organize all the logic in the system. Designing is evolutionary, and systems designed using the 
agile approach are conceptualized as evolving, as always being designed.
Good design is often simple. Design should allow flexibility as well. Designing well permits 
you to make extensions to the system by making changes only in one place. Effective design locates 
logic near the data on which it will be operating. Above all, design should be useful to all those 
who will need it as the development effort proceeds, including customers as well as programmers.
Four Resource Control Variables of Agile Modeling. Completing all the activities in a project on 
time and within all the constraints is admirable. As you have probably realized by now, however, 
to accomplish this, project management is crucial. Managing a project doesn’t mean simply getting 
all the tasks and resources together. It also means that the analyst is faced with a number of trade-
offs. Sometimes cost may be predetermined, and at other junctures time may be the most important 
factor. These resource control variables (time, cost, quality, and scope) are discussed next.
Time You need to allow enough time to complete a project. Time, however, is split into many 
separate pieces. You need time to listen to the customers, time to design, time to code, and time 
to test.


===== BOOK PAGE 176 =====

176    PART ii •  inFoRMATion  REQuiREMEnTS AnAly SiS
One of our friends is an owner of a Chinese restaurant. Recently, he found himself short-
staffed as one of the members of his reliable crew left the U.S. to return to Hong Kong to get 
married. Since he was trained as a chef, the owner placed himself in the kitchen, so the food was 
served on time, but he stopped greeting his customers out front in the usual way. He sacrificed 
the listening activity to achieve another activity, but in this case, he found out it was hurting his 
business. Customers wanted the attention the owner had always shown them and that they expected.
It is the same in systems development. You can create quality software but fail to listen. You 
can design a perfect system but not allow enough time to test it. Time is difficult to manage. If 
you find yourself running short of time, what do you do?
The agile approach challenges the notion that more time will give you the results you want. 
Perhaps the customer would prefer that you finish on time rather than extend the deadline to 
add another feature. Customers, we often find, are happy if some of the functionality is up and 
running on time. Our experience shows that often a customer is 80 percent satisfied with the first 
20 percent of the functionality. This means that when you complete the final 80 percent of the 
project, the customer may be only slightly happier than they were after you completed the first 
20 percent. The message here is to be careful not to extend your deadline. The agile approach 
insists on finishing on time.
Cost Cost is the second variable we can consider adjusting. Suppose the activities of coding, 
designing, testing, and listening are weighing down the project and the resources we put into 
time, scope, and quality are not sufficient, even with a normal amount devoted to cost, to balance 
the project. Essentially, we might be required to contribute more resources that require money to 
balance the project.
The easiest way to increase spending (and hence costs) is to hire more people. This may 
appear to be the perfect solution. If we hire more coders, we’ll finish faster. Right? Not necessarily. 
Picture hiring two people to repair a roof and increase that number to four. Soon the people are 
bumping into one another. Furthermore, they need to ask each other what still needs to be done. 
And if there’s a lightning storm, no one will be working. Going from two to four doesn’t mean it 
will take half the time. Consider the required increase in communication and other intangible costs 
when you are contemplating hiring more people. Remember that when new people join a team, 
they do not know the project or the team. They will slow down the original members because the 
original members must devote time to getting new members up to speed.
Overtime doesn’t help much either. It increases the cost, but productivity doesn’t always 
follow. Tired computer programmers are less effective than alert computer programmers. Tired 
computer programmers take a long time to complete a task, and they also make mistakes that are 
even more time-consuming to fix.
Is there anything else we can spend our money on to facilitate finishing a project? Perhaps. 
A variety of tools are available to support analysts and coders. These tools are often wise invest-
ments. Analysts, for example, use graphical packages such as Microsoft Visio to communicate 
ideas about a project to others, and CASE tools such as Visible Analyst also help speed up projects.
Even new hardware could be a worthwhile expenditure. Laptops and smartphones improve 
productivity away from the office. Larger visual displays, Bluetooth-enabled keyboards, mice, 
and more powerful graphics cards also may increase productivity.
Quality The third resource control variable is quality. If ideal systems are perfect, why is so 
much effort placed in maintaining systems? Are we already practicing agile development by 
sacrificing quality in software development? In Chapter 16, we will see the importance of quality 
and methods (such as TQM and Six Sigma) that help to ensure that software quality is high.
The agile philosophy allows an analyst to adjust the quality resource and perhaps put less effort 
into maintaining quality than otherwise would be expected. Quality can be adjusted both internally 
and externally. Internal quality involves testing software for factors such as functionality (Does 
an application do what it is supposed to do?) and conformance (Does the software meet certain 
conformance standards and is it maintainable?). It usually doesn’t pay to tinker with internal quality.
That leaves us with external quality, or how the customer perceives the system. The customer 
is interested in performance. Some of the questions a customer may ask are: Does the application 
act reliably (or do software bugs still exist)? Are the reports generated by the system effective? 
Do system-generated reports reach me on time? Does the software run effortlessly? Is the user 
interface easy to understand and use?


===== BOOK PAGE 177 =====

CHAPTER 6  •  AgilE  ModEling, PR o To TyPing, And SCR uM     177
The extreme philosophy of agile development allows some of the external quality issues to 
be sacrificed. In order for a system to be released on time, the customer may have to contend with 
some software bugs. If we want to meet our deadline, the user interface may not be perfect. We 
can make it better in a follow-up version.
Commercial off-the-shelf software manufacturers do sacrifice quality, and it is debatable 
whether this is a good approach. Developers may be using extreme programming as one of their 
agile practices, so don’t be surprised when your PC software applications (not to mention your 
operating system and web browser) are updated often.
Scope Finally, there is scope. In the agile approach, scope is determined by listening to customers 
and getting them to write down their stories. Then the stories are examined to see how much can 
be done in a given time to satisfy the customer. Stories should be brief and easy to grasp. Stories 
will be described in more detail later in this chapter, but here is a brief example showing four short 
stories from an online air travel system. Each story is shown in bold type.
Display alternative flights.
Prepare a list of the five cheapest flights.
Offer cheaper alternatives.
Suggest to customers that they travel on other days, make weekend stays, take special 
promotions, or use alternate airports.
Purchase a ticket.
Allow the customer to purchase a ticket directly using a credit card (check validity).
Allow the customer to choose their seat.
Direct the customer to a visual display of the airplane and ask the customer to select a seat.
Ideally, the analyst would be able to determine how much time and money is needed to 
complete each of these stories and would be able to set the level of quality for them as well. It 
is obvious that this system must not sacrifice quality or credit card purchases may be invalid or 
customers may show up at the airport without required reservations.
Once again, agile practices allow extreme measures, so to maintain quality, manage cost, and 
complete a project on time, an agile analyst may want to adjust the scope of the project. This can 
be accomplished by agreeing with the customer that one or more of the stories can be delayed until 
the next version of the software. For example, maybe the functionality of allowing customers to 
choose their own seats can be put off for another time.
In summary, an agile analyst can control any of the four resource variables of time, cost, 
quality, and scope. Agility calls for extreme measures and places a great deal of importance on 
completing a project on time. In doing so, sacrifices must be made, and the agile analyst will find 
out that the available trade-offs involve difficult decisions.
Four Core Agile Practices. Four core practices markedly distinguish the agile approach from 
other approaches: short releases, the 40-hour workweek, hosting an on-site customer, and using 
pair programming:
1. Short releases means that the development team compresses the time between releases 
of the product. Rather than release a full-blown version in a year, using the short release 
practice, the team will tackle the most important features first, release that system or 
product, and then improve it later.
2. Forty-hour workweek means that agile development teams purposely endorse a cultural 
core practice in which the team works intensely together during a typical 40-hour 
workweek. As a corollary to this practice, the culture reinforces the idea that working 
overtime for more than a week in a row is very bad for the health of the project and the 
developers. This core practice attempts to motivate team members to work intensely at the 
job, and then to take time off so they are relaxed and less stressed when they return. This 
helps team members spot problems more readily and prevents costly errors and omissions 
due to ineffectual performance or burnout.
3. On-site customer means that a user who is an expert in the business aspect of the systems 
development work is on-site during the development process. This person is integral to  
the process, writes user stories, communicates to team members, helps prioritize and 
balance the long-term business needs, and makes decisions about which feature should  
be tackled first.


===== BOOK PAGE 178 =====

178    PART ii •  inFoRMATion  REQuiREMEnTS AnAly SiS
4. Pair programming is an important core practice. It means that you work with another 
programmer of your own choosing. You both do coding, you both run tests. Often the senior 
person will take the coding lead initially, but as the junior person becomes involved, whoever 
has the clear vision of the goal will typically do the coding for the moment. When you ask 
another person to work with you, the protocol of pair programming says they are obligated to 
consent. Working with another programmer helps you clarify your thinking. Pairs change fre-
quently, especially during the exploration stage of the development process. Pair programming 
saves time, cuts down on sloppy thinking, sparks creativity, and is a fun way to program.
How core agile practices interrelate with and support agile development activities, resources, 
and values is shown in Figure 6.3.
The Agile Development Process
Modeling is a keyword in agile methods. Agile modeling seizes on the opportunity to create models. 
These can be logical models such as drawings of systems, or mock-ups, such as the prototypes 
described earlier in this chapter. A typical agile modeling process would go something like this:
1. Listen for user stories from the customer.
2. Draw a logical workflow model to gain an appreciation for the business decisions 
represented in the user story.
FIGURE 6.3
The core practices are interrelated with agile modeling’s resources, activities, and values.
4 0 - h o u r  W o r k w e e k
S h o r t  R e l e a s e
P a i r  P r o g r a m m i n g O n - s i t e  C u s t o m e r
Agile Core Practices
S i m p l i c i t yC o m m u n i c a t i o n
C o u r a g e F e e d b a c k
Agile Values
C o s tTi m e
S c o p e Qu a l i t y
Agile Resources
Te s t i n gC o d i n g
De s i g n i n g Li s t e n i n g
Agile Activities


===== BOOK PAGE 179 =====

CHAPTER 6  •  AgilE  ModEling, PR o To TyPing, And SCR uM     179
3. Create new user stories based on the logical model.
4. Develop some display prototypes. In doing so, show the customers what sort of interface 
they will have.
5. Use feedback from the prototypes and the logical workflow diagrams to develop the 
system until you have created a physical data model.
Agile is the other keyword in agile modeling. Agile implies maneuverability and nimbleness. 
Today’s systems, especially those that are web-based, pose twin demands: getting software 
released as soon as possible and continually improving the software to add new features.  
A systems analyst needs to have the ability and the methods to create dynamic, context-sensitive, 
scalable, and evolutionary applications. Agile modeling is therefore a change-embracing method.
USER STORIES
A user story is a casual explanation of a software feature written from the perspective of a 
customer or end user. A user story should emphasize business value.
Obtaining user stories is primarily a way for analysts to communicate with users and each 
other. It is useful to consider them as conversation starters between developers and users. It means 
you are approaching user stories with the right amount of humility. You recognize that they are 
the beginning of your interactions with users, not your only interactions. You want to find out 
from the user what business requirements are most important to them. In its essence, a user story 
may take the simple form of “As a <type of user>, I can <some goal> so that <some reason>.”
There are many commercial or free tools that attempt to automate parts of the work of 
capturing and understanding user stories and many other tasks of agile development. Over the 
years their fortunes have waxed and waned. Some are acquired or merged with other companies and 
rebranded, becoming robust digital transformation software companies, and some are defunct. As 
of the writing of this book, Jira software provides extensive support for agile development including 
capturing and analyzing user stories, as does Planbox, ScrumDesk, Agilio for trac, and digital.ai.
Every agile software tool goes about collecting, analyzing, and categorizing user stories in 
different ways. However, examining the process for creating user stories in Jira is instructive and 
the guidelines apply to whether you are developing user stories with or without the support of 
agile software:
1. Each user story should stand on its own without other user stories.
2. Each user story is negotiable among project stakeholders.
3. Each user story focuses on the user’s requirements and how they relate to business value.
To explain further, remember that each user story is uniquely independent of all others. User 
stories are negotiated among project stakeholders to find out what needs to be done for the best 
system performance. User stories focus keenly on the user, especially their requirements.
When asked what features of user story management agile teams should look for when 
moving from manual tools such as index cards, Kanban boards and large, visible charts to software 
tools, team members cited such features as “user stories and epics management, estimation of 
user stories in story points, predefined types of user stories, decomposition of epics/bigger user 
stories into smaller ones,” and so on.
Researchers found that agile developers devote considerable time to finding the right tool 
for agile project support. In addition, it was found that practitioners are likely to choose agile 
software tools that are:
1. Easy to set up initially.
2. Effortless to learn (do not have a steep learning curve).
3. Uncomplicated to use once installed.
4. Customizable to suit particular projects.
Practitioners expressed strong preference for useful tools that are readily understandable, in 
favor of more sophisticated tools that required a larger investment of time to set up and learn, and 
to subsequently teach others on the team.
Researchers (Soares et al., 2015) examined the link between user stories and neglecting 
documentation until later in the development cycle. They found that the low level of detail in user


===== BOOK PAGE 180 =====

180    PART ii •  inFoRMATion  REQuiREMEnTS AnAly SiS
stories is the “primary reason for difficulties.” The research team cautioned that, “In particular, 
the use of user stories reduces the focus on requirement specification tasks and, as a consequence, 
creates difficulties that need to be overcome by the development team.” So that reinforces our idea 
that user stories are a beginning in requirements determination, not an ending.
A number of researchers are attempting to improve the usefulness of user stories. Overall, 
they have found that basic functionality is well supported by agile software tools.
Writing User Stories: An Example
Even though the title of this section is “Writing User Stories,” the emphasis in the creation 
of user stories is on day-to-day spoken interaction between developers and users, not written 
communication. Therefore, user stories are informal definitions of requirements.
The following is an example of a series of stories written for an ecommerce application for 
an online merchant of books, CDs, movies, and other media products. The stories give a fairly 
complete picture of what is needed at each of the stages in the purchase process, but the stories 
are very short and easy to comprehend. The point here is to get all the needs and concerns of the 
online merchant out in the open. Although there is not enough of a story to begin coding, an agile 
developer might begin to see the overall picture clearly enough to begin estimating what it will 
take to complete the project. The stories are as follows.
Welcome the customer.
If the customer has been at this site before using this same computer, welcome the customer 
back to the online store.
Show specials on home page.
Show any books or other products that have recently been introduced. If the customer is 
identified, tailor the recommendations to that specific customer.
Search for desired product.
Include an effective search engine that will locate the specific product and similar 
products.
Show matching titles and availability.
Display the results of the search on a new web page.
Allow customer to ask for greater detail.
Offer the customer more product details, such as sample pages in a book, a video clip from 
a movie, more photos of a product, or to play a partial track from a CD.
Display reviews of the product.
Share the comments that other customers have about the product.
Place a product into a shopping cart.
Make it easy for the customer to click on a button that places the product into a shopping 
cart of intended purchases.
Keep purchase history on file.
Keep details about the customer and their purchases in a cookie on the customer’s 
computer. Also keep credit card information for faster checkout.
Suggest other books that are similar.
Include photos of other books that have similar themes or were written by the same 
authors.
Proceed to checkout.
Confirm the identity of the customer.
Review the purchases.
Allow the customer to review the purchases.
Continue shopping.
Offer the customer an opportunity to make further purchases at the same time.
Apply shortcut methods for faster checkout.
If the identity of the customer is known and the delivery address matches, speed up the 
transaction by accepting the credit card on file and the remainder of the customer’s 
preferences, such as shipping method.
Add names and shipping addresses.
If the purchase is a gift, allow the customer to enter the name and address of the recipient 
along with the option to enclose a gift card.


===== BOOK PAGE 181 =====

CHAPTER 6  •  AgilE  ModEling, PR o To TyPing, And SCR uM     181
Offer options for shipping.
Allow the customer to choose a shipping method based on cost.
Complete the transaction.
Finish the transaction. Ask for credit card confirmation if the shipping address is different 
from the customer’s address on file.
As you can easily see, there is no shortage of stories. An agile analyst needs to choose a few 
stories, complete the coding, and release the product. Once this is done, more stories are selected, 
and a new version is released until all the stories are included in the system (or the analyst and the 
customer agree that a particular story lacks merit or is not pressing and so need not be included).
An example of a user story as it might appear to an agile developer is shown in Figure 6.4. 
On paper cards (or electronically), an analyst might first identify the need or opportunity and then 
follow it with a brief story description. The analyst might take the opportunity to begin thinking 
broadly about the activities that need to be completed as well as the resources it will take to finish 
the project. In this example from the online merchant, the analyst indicates that the designing 
activity will take above-average effort, and the time and quality resources are required to rise 
above average. Notice that the analyst is not trying to be more precise than currently possible on 
this estimate, but it is still a useful exercise.
SCRUM
Another agile approach is named Scrum. The word scrum is taken from a starting position in 
rugby in which the rugby teams form a huddle and fight for possession of the ball. Scrum is really 
about teamwork, like what is needed in playing a game of rugby.
Wally chimes in, “Yeah. Why point out our mistakes to 
everyone? Besides, when they see the prototype, they’ll forget any 
complaints they had. They’ll love it.”
Belle finds a memo in her notebook from their last meeting with 
the hatchery managers and reads it aloud. “Agenda for meeting of 
September 22. ‘Prototyping—the importance of rapid development, 
putting together the user analyst team, getting quick feedback for 
modification. . . . ’ ” Belle’s voice trails off, omitting the last few 
agenda items. In the wake of her comments, Sam and Wally look 
unhappily at each other.
Sam speaks first: “I guess we did try to get everyone primed 
for receiving a prototype quickly and to be involved from day one.” 
Noting your silence up until now, Sam continues, “But still waters 
run deep. What do you think we should do next?” he asks you.
As the fourth member of the systems analysis team, what 
actions do you think should be taken? In a one- or two-paragraph 
email message to your teammates, answer the following questions: 
Should more features be added to the hatchery system prototype 
before giving it to the hatchery managers to experiment with? How 
important is the rapid development of the prototype? What are the 
trade-offs involved in adding more features to the prototype versus 
getting a more basic prototype to the client when it was promised? 
Complete your message with a recommendation about whether the 
prototype should be delayed in order to add more features or if it 
should be delivered on time with fewer features completed.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 6.3 
To Hatch a Fish
“Just be a little patient. I think we need to add a few more features 
before we turn it over to them. Otherwise, this whole prototype 
will sink, not swim,” says Sam Monroe, a member of your systems 
analysis team. All four members of the team are sitting together in a 
hurriedly called meeting and they are discussing the prototype that 
they are developing for an information system to help managers 
monitor and control water temperature, number of fish released, 
and other factors at a large, commercial fish hatchery.
“They’ve got plenty to do already. Why, the system began 
with four features and we’re already up to nine. I feel like we’re 
swimming upstream on this one. They don’t need all that. They 
don’t even want it,” argues Belle Uga, a second member of the 
systems analysis team. “I don’t mean to carp, but just give them the 
basics. We’ve got enough to tackle as it is.”
“I think Sam is more on target,” volunteers Wally Ide, a third 
member of the team, baiting Belle a little. “We have to show them 
our very best, even if it means being a few weeks later in hatching 
our prototype than we promised.”
“Okay,” Belle says warily, “but I want the two of you to tell the 
managers at the hatchery why we aren’t delivering the prototype. 
I don’t want to. And I’m not sure they’ll let you off the hook that 
easily.”
Sam replies, “Well, I guess we could, but we probably shouldn’t 
make a big deal out of being later than we wanted. I don’t want to 
rock the boat.”


===== BOOK PAGE 182 =====

182    PART ii •  inFoRMATion  REQuiREMEnTS AnAly SiS
Just as rugby teams will come to a game with an overall strategy, development teams begin a 
project with a high-level plan that can be changed on the fly as the “game” progresses. Systems 
development team members realize that the success of the project is most important, and their 
individual success is secondary. The project owner has some, but not much, influence on the 
detail. Rather, the tactical game is left up to the team members, just as if they were on the field. 
The systems team works within a strict time frame (two to four weeks for development), just as 
a rugby team would play in a strict time constraint of a game.
Scrum has become very popular in software development. It is an agile method that is suitable 
for more complex projects in which action needs to be continuous. In the development method 
Scrum, a limited number of features or tasks are selected for completion in a sprint, typically 
lasting two to four weeks. The result of the sprint is a potentially shippable software product. 
Once the sprint ends, the process begins again with new priorities and features to be finished in 
the next sprint.
Roles Played in Scrum
There are three roles in Scrum.
1. Product owner
2. Scrum Master
3. Team member
The product owner might be viewed as a project creator because they express the vision for 
the product. The product owner is also responsible for initial plans for the project, releases of the 
product, and the final assessment.
The Scrum Master plays many roles, including serving as the team’s coach, a knowledgeable 
adviser, an experienced developer, and a facilitator. The Scrum Master is indeed a coach, but 
this person may take on additional roles that can be metaphorically described as captain of a 
ship, a jungle guide who clears paths for the team, or even a guardian. A Scrum Master needs to 
be both knowledgeable in agile practices and have the experience to help the team. The Scrum 
Master is a facilitator of the team, but sometimes takes on the role of clearing obstacles for them 
(like the jungle guide). The culture of the group depends on the Scrum Master, since they select 
the team members, organize and moderate Scrum meetings, and moderate conflict internally 
and externally.
FIGURE 6.4
User stories can be recorded on cards. The user story should be brief enough for an analyst to determine what systems 
features are needed.
Need or Opportunity: Apply shortcut methods for faster checkout.
Story:
Well Below
CodingActivities:
Testing
Listening
Designing
TimeResources:
Cost
Quality
Scope
Below Average Average Above Average Well Above
If the identity of the customer is known and the delivery address matches, speed up the
transaction by accepting the credit card on ﬁle and the rest of the customer’s preferences
such as shipping method.


===== BOOK PAGE 183 =====

CHAPTER 6  •  AgilE  ModEling, PR o To TyPing, And SCR uM     183
Team members play a more significant role in Scrum. Team members:
1. Work to create and improve user stories.
2. Generate estimates.
3. Self-organize to complete the work.
4. Exhibit willingness to participate in any activity to help the project.
Team members are chosen for their managerial as well as technical skills. Recall that 
mangerial skills include communication and building relationships. Members may include 
designers, coders, a user interface expert, a tester, and a domain expert who knows about the 
business and the customer.
The Product Backlog
The product backlog is composed of features and other deliverables designers intend for the 
product based on user stories. In addition to listing features to add to an application, a product 
backlog also lists bugs to fix or even applications that need to be documented.
Figure 6.5 shows a product backlog registry. User stories are briefly described in the second 
column. Other columns describe who will benefit from completing each user story, what resources 
will be required, and how we will know when the user story is completed and accepted.
The list of user stories is reorganized so that the most important user stories appear on the 
top. There are many ways to prioritize user stories, but small items that can be tackled quickly are 
well suited for the top of the list. Although the list is not strictly in order of shortest processing 
time, it is encouraging to get things done. Completing many small tasks can be more encouraging 
has told her is true. They need the reports, and they’re not getting 
them.
Later in the week Sandy approaches Willa about rerouting 
the computer reports as well as changing some of the features of 
the system to make reports accessible online. These modifications 
would allow Willa to get onscreen answers regarding what-if 
scenarios about changes in the prices suppliers are charging or 
changes in the quality rating of the raw materials available from 
suppliers (or both), as well as allow her to see what would happen 
if a shipment were late.
Willa is disappointed with Sandy’s suggestions for altering the 
prototype and its printed reports. “Oh, don’t do it on my account. 
It’s okay, really. I don’t mind taking the responsibility for routing 
information to people. I’m always showering them with stuff 
anyway. Really, this is working pretty well. I would hate to have 
you take it away from us at this point. Let’s just leave it in place.”
Sandy is pleased that Willa seems so satisfied with the 
prototyped information system, but she is concerned about Willa’s 
unwillingness to change the prototyped reports because she has been 
encouraging users to think of the system as an evolving product, not 
a finished one.
Write a brief report to Sandy listing changes to the prototype 
prompted by Willa’s reactions. In a paragraph, discuss ways that 
Sandy can calm Willa’s fears about having the prototype “taken 
away.” Discuss in a paragraph some actions that can be taken before 
a prototype is tried out to prepare users for its evolutionary nature.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 6.4 
This Prototype Is All Wet
“It  can be changed. It’s not a finished product, remember,” affirms 
Sandy Beach, a systems analyst for RainFall, a large manufacturer of 
fiberglass and acrylic bathtub and shower enclosures for bathrooms. 
Beach is anxiously reassuring Willa Lather, a production scheduler 
for RainFall, who is poring over the first report produced for her by 
the prototype of the new information system.
“Well, it’s okay,” Lather says quietly. “I wouldn’t want to bother 
you with anything. Let’s see, . . . yes, here they are,” she says as 
she finally locates the monthly report summarizing raw materials 
purchased, raw materials used, and raw materials in inventory.
Lather continues looking through the multiple pages of the new 
computer-generated reports. “This will be fine.” Pausing at a report, 
she remarks, “I’ll just have Jiang copy this part for Accounting. 
Since it’s his department, he won’t mind.” Turning a few more 
pages, she says, “And the people in Quality Assurance should really 
see this column of figures, although the rest of it isn’t of much 
interest to them. I’ll circle it and make a copy of it for them. Maybe 
I should phone part of this into the warehouse too.”
As Sandy prepares to leave, Willa bundles up the pages of the 
reports, commenting, “The new system will be a big help. I’ll make 
sure everybody knows about it. Anything will be better than the ‘old 
monster’ anyway. I’m glad we’ve got something new.”
Sandy leaves Willa’s office feeling a little lost at sea. Thinking 
it over, she starts wondering why Accounting, Quality Assurance, 
and the warehouse aren’t getting what Willa thinks they should. 
Sandy phones a few people, and she confirms that what Lather


===== BOOK PAGE 184 =====

184    PART ii •  inFoRMATion  REQuiREMEnTS AnAly SiS
than tackling one large task. User stories need to be understood by everyone on the team in order 
to work on the list. User stories that are not clear can be placed further down on the product 
backlog list.
The Sprint Cycle
Keeping a list in product backlog is one thing, but the registry doesn’t accomplish anything unless 
the team starts working on user stories in the list. A sprint backlog is created to select the user 
stories that need to be completed soon. Stories are deliverables the team accomplishes. Tasks, on 
the other hand, are parts of the story or units of work that each team member does.
The sprint cycle can vary in length, but we find that most companies set two weeks as the 
length of a sprint cycle. That gives the team two weeks to dispatch with a few user stories and 
then decide whether the product is ready to be released. That may seem impossible at first, but 
once a team gets into the habit of a two-week cycle, it begins to become routine and satisfying 
at the same time.
At the end of the two-week cycle, the team needs to determine whether the product should be 
released. The first question is, “Does this potential product release have value?” The product (the 
app or the website the team has been working on) should have value over the previous release. 
The second question is, “Is the product release ready to ship?” The team must have completed and 
tested the new features based on user stories. It must work and be free of errors.
Two-week releases have many advantages. The spirit of the team remains high because it is 
easy to measure accomplishments. Completing the product is more real to the team. If the team 
can tackle issues in a short period of time, it just takes a number of two-week releases to get the 
entire project completed.
Other advantages include the continual feedback the team gets from the customers. Short 
releases are prototypes. Customers’ reactions are very valuable.
Figure 6.6 shows the process and people involved in a sprint cycle. Notice that the project 
owner, teams of developers, and newly developed software products all have a part to play. Sprints 
are short cycles of team development activity lasting only two to four weeks, with teams meeting 
daily during the sprint to create a new release that is ready to ship.
Other Unique Scrum Features
A few other aspects are unique to Scrum. They include a planning meeting, daily Scrum meetings, 
charts that monitor progress, and a sprint review.
FIGURE 6.5
A product backlog registry.
Number Tasks based on user stories
Make it easier to continue
shopping once an item is
placed in the shopping cart
Who will beneﬁt Resources required Will be accepted when
W212
Oﬀer options for shipping
earlier in the online ordering
process
W210
Add product reviews by
peers
Visitors to the
website
Visitors to the
website
Users who would
feel more conﬁdent
having these
reviews available
Minor coding eﬀort,
testing
Dynamically calculating
rates based on zip code
and preferred delivery
speed, coding, testing
Collaborative ﬁltering,
redesign of product
pages, coding, testing
Users react positively to
the prototype, coding is
completed and tested
Validity is checked, code
is tested, information is
approved as
understandable to users
Users approve of the
prototype and the
collaborative system is
thoroughly tested
W211


===== BOOK PAGE 185 =====

CHAPTER 6  •  AgilE  ModEling, PR o To TyPing, And SCR uM     185
Scrum Planning Meeting. There are two parts to a Scrum planning meeting. First, the product 
owner presents the list of features on the wish list of user stories. At this point, the team asks 
questions of the product owner.
The second part involves estimating the resources needed to complete all of the features.  
A common way to do this is to play planning poker, which is described in the next section.  
A card game approach to estimating makes the atmosphere of the meeting more enjoyable. Team 
members need to socialize, and Scrum planning meetings provide good opportunities to do so. The 
team members lead this part of the Scrum planning meeting. The team chooses the deliverables 
(user stories) that need to be accomplished. The team also divides the work into tasks. Team 
members are in control from this point on. They prioritize the selected user stories and make a 
commitment to finish a certain number of them by the end of the current sprint cycle.
Scrum Planning Poker. Scrum planning poker is a way to help the team determine estimates 
for completing the features that arise from user stories. Planning poker is played using a deck of 
cards as shown in Figure 6.7. The sequence of numbers starts low and rapidly grows larger. The 
rationale is that there is much uncertainty in estimating larger user stories. A commonly used 
deck is based on Fibonacci numbers, 0, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, and 89. (A Fibonacci number 
is generated by adding the two previous numbers, which guarantees that the interval between 
numbers becomes larger as the numbers get bigger.) In addition, decks sometimes include an 
FIGURE 6.6
How teams work together to accomplish a sprint cycle for developing a new release.
Project Owner
creates a
Product Backlog
T eams
determine the
Sprint Backlog
T eams have
daily meetings
during the sprint
When a sprint
is ﬁnished, the
new release is
ready to ship
Sprints last
for 2–4 weeks
Potentially
Shippable
Product
FIGURE 6.7
A Fibonacci number–based deck 
of cards is used to play planning 
poker during a Scrum. Play the 
coffee card if you need a break.
?
?
?
`
`
89 `
89
89
55
55
55
34
34
34
21
21
21
13
13
13
8
8
8
5
5
5
3
3
3
2
2
2
1
1
1
0
0
0


===== BOOK PAGE 186 =====

186    PART ii •  inFoRMATion  REQuiREMEnTS AnAly SiS
infinity symbol representing a number too big to surpass, a question mark, and a coffee cup (used 
when members need a break from estimating). Here are the rules of the game:
1. A moderator keeps the estimation meeting running efficiently.
2. The product owner presents one of the user stories that needs to be estimated.
3. Each team member chooses a card with a number on it and lays it face down. A low-
numbered card means that a project can be completed faster than the estimates on the  
high-numbered cards. The numbers may represent the number of days it may take to  
finish a feature, story points, or even difficulty in abstract terms.
4. Team members turn over their cards at the same time. (This avoids the problem of 
anchoring or giving importance to the first estimate mentioned.)
5. The team members with the highest and lowest estimates have the opportunity to defend 
their ratings.
6. The entire team can now discuss the estimates. Ideally, the moderator should place a time 
limit on the discussion. A timer on a smartphone is a good way to limit the discussion.
7. A new hand is then played, and so on. When a consensus on the time estimate for 
developing the features is reached, the team can move on to the next user story.
Planning poker can be a highly useful (and fun) way to develop estimates of completion times 
for the work designers are doing on user stories. Good estimates are difficult for inexperienced 
developers, so a tool like this can improve the reliability of the team’s estimates without placing 
an undue burden on newer team members.
Daily Scrum Meetings. The meeting that starts off the daily Scrum is called a stand-up meeting 
because it lasts only a few minutes (the concept implies that team members will stand, but only 
for a short time). At this meeting team members tell each other what tasks they’ve been working 
on since the previous daily Scrum, what tasks they expect to complete during the current daily 
Scrum, and what obstacles might get in their way. Most of the time, these obstacles can’t be solved 
during the 15-minute meeting, but it is important to identify them then.
Using Burndown Charts. One way to keep track of performance is to use a sprint burndown 
chart. An example of a burndown chart, which can be updated on a daily basis, is shown in 
Figure 6.8. The horizontal axis tracks the time that has elapsed. The vertical axis may track the 
number of tasks remaining or the number of hours to completion of the remaining tasks. The red 
line shows the hours of work remaining, and the yellow bars show the number of tasks remaining, 
all plotted against time (in this case in terms of a sprint cycle). Burndown charts are useful ways 
to graphically show the progress of an agile software development project.
Sprint Review. At the end of a sprint, the team gets together in a meeting to review the work that 
was done and note any tasks that were not completed. The user stories completed are prominently 
documented, and user stories the team committed to that were not finished are noted. The team 
is not making decisions for the next sprint. That will occur when the team repeats the steps start-
ing with creating a new product backlog. The sprint review is a retrospective in which the team 
FIGURE 6.8
A burndown chart shows progress 
on the systems project, depicting 
work remaining versus the time 
(measured in sprint cycles).
15
12
9
Number of T asks Remaining
(Gold Bars)6
3
013121110987
Sprint Cycle
6543210
50
100
150
200
250
Hours of Work Remaining
(Red Line)


===== BOOK PAGE 187 =====

CHAPTER 6  •  AgilE  ModEling, PR o To TyPing, And SCR uM     187
articulates accomplishments and lessons learned. By stating what went well and what did not, the 
team can improve the process in anticipation of the next sprint.
Kanban
Kanban is a concept developed by Toyota to achieve a more effective and efficient way 
of delivering products. The word’s meaning in English is “signboard,” a method of directing 
consumers to certain areas to find products or directing employees to a location to replenish items. 
The concept of kanban is widely used in software development today.
Key elements of the kanban system as applied to software development are:
1. Visualize the workflow.
2. Keep work in progress (WIP) as small as possible.
3. Reevaluate the workflow, reassigning priorities if need be.
4. Strive for continual improvement, eliminating bottlenecks and evaluating WIP limits.
It is desirable to set up a workflow summary like that shown in Figure 6.9, a kanban board 
adapted for Scrum. It was created by a company in the Netherlands and has a proprietary tool 
called patboard, which helps developers visually display progress on their agile projects. The 
cards are magnetic and washable and can be reused. They are easy to pick up and place as your 
project progresses, and they are small enough to depict many parts of the project but large enough 
to be seen from across the room where the patboard is displayed. All of this can be done using 
software, but the tactile nature and the easy movement of a magnetic card from one column to the 
next makes this process more interactive and enjoyable.
Kanban is based on a pull system. Here is an example: A new user story is introduced that 
states the company website must be updated. This notice means that a kanban “card” should be 
created. This work happened to be high priority, so it is pulled from the “backlog” column to the 
“sprint” column. Soon it is pulled into the “to-do” column. When the web designers begin to work 
on it, they pull the task into the “doing” column. Once the new web pages are created, the task is 
pulled into the “verify” column so links can be tested and validated. When testing is completed, 
the task is pulled into the “done” column.
Note that the task was never pushed into another column. The concept of a pull system helps 
ascertain accountability and responsibility when projects require teams of people.
FIGURE 6.9
A kanban board can be created 
using the tools visible at  
www.patboard.com.


===== BOOK PAGE 188 =====

188    PART ii •  inFoRMATion  REQuiREMEnTS AnAly SiS
Cycle time is the time it takes for a task to enter the system as a “backlog” item until it reaches 
the “done” column. The shorter the time, the better. Throughput is the average number of items 
that move from the “backlog” column to the “done” column in a certain period of time or cycle. 
You can calculate throughput using the following equation:
TP WIP/CT=
where WIP is the work in progress and CT is the cycle time.
So, if there are 12 user stories in progress during a four-week period, throughput is calculated 
as 12 divided by 4, resulting in a throughput of 3 user stories per cycle. This is, of course, a 
guideline. The actual number of user stories completed may vary depending on several factors.
The concept of kanban is applicable to all forms of agile methods. When applied to Scrum, 
some have used the term scrumban. They point out that scrumban is different from kanban because 
fixed scrum sprints are employed.
Scrum Advantages and Disadvantages
Scrum has many advantages, including:
1. Quick product development
2. User-oriented approach
3. Encouraging teamwork
4. Less confusing than more formal approaches
5. Flexibility
6. Satisfying to team members
7. Rewarding smaller but meaningful accomplishments
8. Providing feedback
9. Adaptability
Scrum has many disadvantages which include:
1. Documenting features improperly
2. Releasing products with errors
3. Releasing products too soon for the user
4. Completing the sprint backlog under pressure
5. Working as a geographically dispersed team may be difficult
6. Working as a team when special skills are required may be challenging
7. Replacing team members who leave the team is difficult
Developers need to pay attention to minimize the effect of any disadvantages.
Scrum is a high-intensity methodology that has many advantages for developing complex and 
innovative packages. It is one approach that adopts the philosophy of agile modeling; however, if 
it becomes too intense, an organization may decide to use another agile method.
DEVOPS: A CULTURAL SHIFT FOR APP DEVELOPMENT
DevOps, which is derived from the words development and operations, is one way to decrease 
the deployment time for newly developed applications and maximize profit by rapidly addressing 
market opportunities and getting customer feedback in a timely manner. DevOps tries to merge 
these processes.
DevOps is depicted in Figure 6.10. Development and operations are working in parallel streams 
within a DevOps culture. Notice that development is focused on the rapid development of new 
applications, planning, prioritizing, designing, and coding. Operations works on testing, releasing, 
configuring, monitoring, and then maintaining new releases and established application software.
DevOps has been described as a culture rather than as a methodological approach such as 
SDLC or agile development because it requires a different mindset to analyze systems problems 
in this way. Rather than waiting for a systems problem that arises to be solved by the development 
team or arguing about where the error occurred or who is responsible (which wastes time in fixing 
the problem), DevOps creates two approaches in the organization that run on parallel tracks: one 
track supports developing rapid innovative applications, and the other supports the maintenance 
and operations of those processes already in place.


===== BOOK PAGE 189 =====

CHAPTER 6  •  AgilE  ModEling, PR o To TyPing, And SCR uM     189
DevOps uses a process organization centered on value streams. Analysis of 12 to 15 processes 
can be drawn around each stream. Small teams of 5 to 10 people are entirely responsible for a 
value stream. If you’re wondering how big a DevOps team should be, you can use the Amazon 
two-pizza rule as a guide for team size. If the team is not small enough to be fed satisfactorily by 
two large pizzas, then the team is too big. The teams limit their multitasking, working on one to 
three projects at most. They work in small batches and in small steps. They reduce the number of 
handoffs they do to customers who are outside the organization (external) or other departments 
(internal customers). They cut down or eliminate waste by avoiding partially completed work, 
extra processes, task switching, and tracking down defects. To detect errors early, team members 
“swarm” a problem so that it can be fixed immediately and not passed on at a higher cost, and so 
they can learn to avoid those mistakes. Quality is pushed to the team where the work is being done.
DevOps works to make their systems development efforts resilient, and they have “fire drills.” 
Netflix calls these drills “Chaos Monkey”: Shutting down all servers and processes to make 
sure the company can cope with worst-case scenarios. Security vulnerabilities are pushed to the 
DevOps teams and integrated into shared code repositories. At the conclusion of the drill, everyone 
is debriefed to evaluate whether the project was a success or a failure and whether it met the busi-
ness’s goals. If there is a security problem, a postmortem evaluation is conducted on all security 
breaches so that teams can learn from those problems and will not repeat them.
NO-CODE SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT
The development of software has recently shifted from professional programmers to 
nonprogrammers. The idea is that anyone should be able to create software using a graphical user 
interface rather than by writing computer code.
No-code platforms are springing up and, along with these platforms, one can find a range of 
tutorials that will help nonprogrammers design and build websites or mobile apps, for example, 
that only require the user to drag and drop items from a menu to the working area. The items a 
person drags may contain HTML5, CSS, or Javascript, but the user doesn’t need to know how to  
write in any programming language. They only need to know how to drag one of the blocks to the 
working area.
Many platforms for designing no-code apps and websites exist. Wix, Bubble, and WordPress 
are examples of no-code website builders. A person developing a website can use drag-and-drop 
elements like text boxes, buttons, icons, images, maps, and more to add to the workspace to see 
how the web page will look.
Some advantages of no-code development are:
1. No-code software development is cost-effective.
2. No-code development is easier.
3. Development can be quicker with no-code.
4. One person using no-code programming can sometimes do the work of a team.
FIGURE 6.10
DevOps exists in its own culture in 
which two parallel streams work 
to produce a new software release.
Plan
Design Conﬁgure
T est
DEV OPSPrioritizeCode Monitor Release
Development and
operations work
together to produce
quality apps


===== BOOK PAGE 190 =====

190    PART ii •  inFoRMATion  REQuiREMEnTS AnAly SiS
First, it is cost-effective for organizational members to build their own web pages and apps 
using no-code techniques. There is no need to hire or outsource to a professional coder. If an 
employee is knowledgeable about one of the company’s products, they can use the company 
template and write up details about the product directly without asking someone else to write 
HTML code, keeping costs down.
Second, no-code development is easier than traditional coding. Dragging and dropping items 
onto a workspace to develop a website takes less effort than coding in HTML. Third, no-code 
development is quicker. If you only use HTML code once a year, you might need to look up 
symbols and that takes time. And finally, one person can get the project started more quickly. 
Rather than coordinating people who supply the design, build the website, and provide content, 
one person can quickly prototype a website.
Since no-code uses a drag-and-drop mechanism, development time is quicker. Furthermore, 
products now have a familiarity to them. For example, the apps Monday.com and Jotform tables 
have templates that look similar to a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet but which can be easily changed. 
Developers who use these apps spend less time developing their apps because they already 
understand the metaphor used as an interface.
Finally, one person can handle the development on their own. There is less need to consult 
with others since there is no code involved. An individual can also use Monday.com or Airtable 
to create complex dashboards that can be updated automatically.
No-code software development is not without disadvantages. Some disadvantages are:
1. Apps and websites are not developed strategically when anyone can use no-code.
2. Often there is no documentation.
No-code development platforms are appearing everywhere. Microsoft Azure features a low 
code set of tools called Power Apps. It allows the developer to use visual drag-and-drop methods 
to build apps and claims to be able to implement artificial intelligence abilities without the need 
for knowledge about machine learning.
The popularity of no-code software comes from the ability for anyone to redesign the interface 
to make the data understandable and usable by dragging elements to a spreadsheet-like table.
Adopting a no-code app like Monday.com, Jotform, or Airtable in an organization encourages 
everyone to act as designers in order to solve problems urgently without waiting for the data center 
to get around to developing applications for individual departments. Whether this is a good idea 
or not depends on the ability of the employees, the quality of training, the transparency of issues 
to be solved, and the culture of the organization.
Whatever policy the organization adopts to solve its internal problems, no-code software 
development is useful in prototyping and as a tool in agile methods. Expect to see more applications 
and websites designed this way.
WORK MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS FOR AGILE SOFTWARE 
DEVELOPMENT
Agile development may be able to take advantage of new agile forms of project management. 
Microsoft Project may be too organized and unforgiving in agile projects. While it seems like 
development using Scrum and kanban manage themselves, more help may be required.
A new work management system that addresses this concern is Jira. It pictures work as a 
collaborative process and addresses three types of work management situations through the use 
of templates: In Jira, there are templates for kanban and Scrum. In addition, Jira has templates for 
bug tracking. Testing is covered in Chapter 16.
Figure 6.11 shows a Scrum board from Jira. There are four columns representing the to-do 
list, tasks in progress, tasks in review, and tasks that are done. The team member responsible for 
the task is indicated by a photo of the team member.
An epic is a compendium of user stories from customers and end users. Epics can be used 
to organize all of the user stories and break down the tasks into release versions. In Jira, the user 
stories are called “issues,” which are completed though a series of sprints. Jira actually broadens 
the definition as follows: “Issues are the building blocks of any Jira project. An issue could 
represent a story, a bug, a task, or another issue type in your project.”


===== BOOK PAGE 191 =====

CHAPTER 6  •  AgilE  ModEling, PR o To TyPing, And SCR uM     191
An epic can describe the big picture in agile development. An epic can provide a roadmap, or 
plan of future action, that will take place over time. It is possible to identify a theme, or set of goals, 
based on the epic as well. The roadmap, as shown in Figure 6.12, can be broken down through 
decomposition in small tasks or initiatives that can be completed over a short period of time.
Keeping track of things in an epic serves as a way to document agile software development. 
Documentation includes these elements:
1. Reporting responsibilities. Epics can be used to communicate with others and since they 
are at a higher level, they are especially useful reporting to management.
2. Revealing user stories. When user stories are revealed, the epic can show the progression 
from start to finish; that is, how the team arrived at the current state and how modifications 
along the way changed the outcome.
3. Sizing the epic. In other words, what are the boundaries of the epic? At some point issues 
described are identified as not being part of the epic. In addition, a decision needs to be 
made about how detailed the epic should be. These questions are best answered knowing 
about an organization’s past practices and culture.
4. Deciding on the time period. Besides the questions about scope and details mentioned 
in the previous point, the development team needs to define the amount of time an epic 
should take. For example, when does the team stop adding features to OS 14 and start 
developing OS 15?
There are some advantages to using automated agile work management software like Jira.
1. The structured approach helps keep work on track. Agile doesn’t mean haphazard or 
random. Agile development should be meaningful, logical, and orderly.
2. The work management software can be set up to automate the process. For example, it can 
automatically add three user stories to the epic and automatically close user stories when 
the epic is marked done.
FIGURE 6.11
Scrum boards can be produced easily using Jira. (Courtesy: Atlassian)


===== BOOK PAGE 192 =====

192    PART ii •  inFoRMATion  REQuiREMEnTS AnAly SiS
3. It can summarize and report progress. Jira accomplishes this through a feature called 
“Insights,” shown in Figure 6.13.
4. Automated work management systems can communicate well. Developers can take photos 
of their scribbles on whiteboards, but in reality, attractive reports displayed on screens or 
printed reports in color are more impressive. They tend to be more readable and thus aid in 
better communication.
COMPARING AGILE MODELING AND  
STRUCTURED METHODS
As you have seen, agile approaches develop releases quickly, they reportedly work, and users are 
customers who are directly involved. Although it is true that projects developed using agile methods 
often require tweaking to work properly, agile developers state that tweaking is part of the process. 
The agile approach implies many short releases, with features added along the way.
Lessons Learned from Agile Modeling
Often posed as an alternative way to develop systems, the agile approach seeks to address common 
complaints arising about the traditional SDLC approach: being too time-consuming, focusing on 
data rather than on humans, and being too costly. The agile approach is rapid, iterative, flexible, 
and participative in responding to changing human information requirements, business conditions, 
and environments.
Several agile development projects have been chronicled in books and articles and on 
websites. Many of them were successes, some have been failures. We can learn a great deal from 
studying them and the agile values, principles, and core practices. Following are the six major 
lessons we draw from our examination of agile modeling. Figure 6.14 depicts the six lessons.
The first lesson is that short releases allow systems to evolve. Product updates are made 
often, and changes are incorporated quickly. In this way the system is permitted to grow and 
expand in ways that the customer finds useful. Using short releases, the development team 
FIGURE 6.12
A roadmap produced in Jira. (Courtesy: Atlassian)


===== BOOK PAGE 193 =====

CHAPTER 6  •  AgilE  ModEling, PR o To TyPing, And SCR uM     193
compresses the time between releases of their product, improving the product later as the 
dynamic situation demands.
The second lesson is that pair programming enhances overall quality. Although pair 
programming is controversial, it clearly fosters other positive activities necessary in systems 
development such as good communication, identifying with the customer, focusing on the most 
valuable aspects of the project first, testing all code as it is developed, and integrating the new 
code after it successfully passes its tests.
The third lesson is that on-site customers are mutually beneficial to the business and the 
agile development team. Customers serve as a ready reference and a reality check. The focus of 
the system design is maintained via their presence: customers become more like developers, and 
developers empathize more fully with customers.
The fourth lesson we take from the agile approach is that the 40-hour workweek improves 
effectiveness. Even the hardest-hitting developers are susceptible to errors and burnout if they 
work too hard for too long a period. When the development team is together, however, every 
moment counts. Working at a sustainable pace is much more desirable for the life of the project, 
the life of the system, and the life of the developer!
The fifth lesson we draw from the agile approach is that balanced resources and activities 
support project goals. Managing a project doesn’t mean simply getting all resources and tasks 
together. It also means that the analyst is faced with a number of trade-offs. Sometimes cost may 
be predetermined, at other junctures time may be the most important factor. The resource control 
variables of time, cost, quality, and scope need to be properly balanced with the activities of 
coding, designing, testing, and listening.
The last lesson we take from agile modeling approaches is that agile values are crucial to 
success. It is essential to the overall success of the project that analysts wholeheartedly embrace 
the values of communication, simplicity, feedback, and courage in all the work that they do. This 
type of personal and team commitment enables the analyst to succeed where others, who possess 
similar technical competencies but who lack these values, will fail. True dedication to these values 
is fundamental to successful development using the agile approach.
FIGURE 6.13
Insights produced using Jira software can give management the ability to see how a project is progressing. (Courtesy: Atlassian)


===== BOOK PAGE 194 =====

194    PART ii •  inFoRMATion  REQuiREMEnTS AnAly SiS
Improving Efficiency in Knowledge Work: SDLC versus Agile
Researchers Davis and Naumann (1999) developed a list of seven strategies that can improve 
the efficiency of knowledge work: reducing interface time and errors, reducing process learning 
time and dual-processing losses, reducing time and effort to structure tasks and format outputs, 
reducing nonproductive expansion of work, reducing data and knowledge search and storage 
time and costs, reducing communication and coordination time and costs, and reducing losses 
from human information overload. Based on their study of a group of programmers, Davis and 
Naumann claimed that the best programmers are 5 to 10 times more productive than the worst 
ones. They further pointed out this ratio is only 2:1 for workers in clerical or physical tasks. Their 
suggestion is that software can help improve many situations.
Adopting more software may indeed improve performance, but it is reasonable to suggest 
that changing an approach or a methodology may also improve performance. Consequently, we 
use the traditional systems development approach to examine each aspect of knowledge work 
productivity through the lenses of both structured and agile methodologies. Figure 6.15 lists the 
original seven strategies for productivity improvement and explains what methods are used to 
improve the efficiency of systems development for both structured and agile methodologies.
In the following sections we compare and contrast structured approaches with the agile 
approach. An overarching observation about the agile methodology is that it is a human-oriented 
approach that permits people to create nuanced solutions that are impossible to create through 
formal specifications of process.
Reducing the Interface Time and Errors. Systems analysts and programmers need to analyze, 
design, and develop systems using knowledge work tools that range from Microsoft Office to 
sophisticated and costly CASE tools. They also need to document as they develop systems. It is 
important that analysts and coders are capable of understanding the interface they use. They need 
to know how to classify, code, store, and write about the data they gather. Systems developers 
also need to quickly access an application, enter the required information, and retrieve it when it 
is needed again.
Structured approaches encourage adopting standards for everything. Rules set forth include 
items such as “Google Chrome will be the default on office desktops for browsing rather than 
Firefox.” There may be more detailed instructions to ensure clean data, such as “Always use 
I for Internal Customer and E for External Customer,” thereby ensuring that analysts do not 
unthinkingly choose codes of their own, such as 0 for Internal Customer and 1 for Exernal 
FIGURE 6.14
Six vital lessons can be drawn 
from the agile approach to 
systems.
Balanced resources
and activities support
project goals
On-site customers
are mutually
beneﬁcial
Lessons Gained
from Adopting
Agile Methods
Agile values are
crucial to
success
Pair programming
enhances overall
quality
Short releases
allow systems
to evolve
40-hour 
workweek improves
eﬀectiveness


===== BOOK PAGE 195 =====

CHAPTER 6  •  AgilE  ModEling, PR o To TyPing, And SCR uM     195
Customer. These rules then become part of the data repository. Forms requiring all personnel to 
document their procedures are useful and are necessary in case another programmer must take 
over during the project.
In an agile approach, forms and procedures work well too, but another element is added. 
The additional practice of pair programming ensures that one programmer will check the work 
of another, thereby reducing the number of errors. Pair programming means that ownership 
of the design or software itself is shared in a partnership. Both partners (typically including a 
programmer, often a senior one) will say they chose a programming partner who desired to have a 
quality product that is error free. With two people working on the same design and code, interface 
time is not an issue; it is an integral part of the process. Davis and Naumann (1999) have noted 
that programmers are quite emotional when the topic of pair programming is broached.
Reducing the Process Learning Time and Dual-Processing Losses. Analysts and programmers 
learn specific techniques and software languages required for the completion of a current project. 
Inefficiencies often result when some analysts and programmers already know the products used 
but others still need to learn them. Typically, we ask that developers learn these products as 
they are using them to build the system. This on-the-job training slows down the entire systems 
development project considerably.
A traditional, structured project requires more learning. If CASE tools are used, an analyst 
may need to learn the proprietary CASE tools used in the organization. The same applies to the 
use of a specific computer language. Documentation is also a concern.
Using an agile philosophy, the ability to launch projects without using CASE tools and 
detailed documentation allows analysts and programmers to spend most of their time on system 
development rather than on learning specific tools.
Reducing the Time and Effort to Structure Tasks and Format Outputs. Whenever a project 
is started, a developer needs to determine the boundaries. In other words, developers need to 
know what the deliverable will be and how they will go about organizing the project so they can 
complete all the necessary tasks.
FIGURE 6.15
How Davis and Naumann’s strategies for improving efficiency can be implemented using two different development 
approaches.
Strategies for Improving
Efﬁciency in Knowledge Work
Implementation Using
Structured Methodologies
Implementation Using
Agile Methodologies
Reduce interface time and errors Adopting organization standards
for coding, naming, etc.; using forms
Adopting pair
programming
Reduce process learning time and
dual processing losses
Managing when updates are released
so the user does not have to learn and
use software at the same time
Ad hoc prototyping and
rapid development
Reduce time and effort to structure
tasks and format outputs
Using CASE tools and diagrams; using
code written by other programmers
Encouraging short
releases
Reduce nonproductive expansion
of work
Managing project; establishing
deadlines
Limiting scope in each
release
Reduce data and knowledge search
and storage time and costs
Using structured data gathering
techniques, such as interviews,
observation, sampling
Allowing for an on-site
customer
Reduce communication and
coordination time and costs
Separating projects into smaller
tasks; establishing barriers
Reduce losses from human
information overload
Applying ﬁltering techniques to
shield analysts and programmers
Timeboxing
Sticking to a 40-hour
workweek


===== BOOK PAGE 196 =====

196    PART ii •  inFoRMATion  REQuiREMEnTS AnAly SiS
A traditional approach would include using CASE tools, drawing diagrams (such as entity-
relationship diagrams and data flow diagrams), using project management software (such as 
Microsoft Project), writing detailed job descriptions, using and reusing forms and templates, and 
reusing code written by other programmers.
Systems development using an agile approach addresses the need to structure tasks by 
scheduling short releases. The agile philosophy suggests that system developers create a series of 
deadlines for many releases of the system. The first releases possess fewer features, but additional 
features are added with each new release.
Reducing the Nonproductive Expansion of Work. Parkinson’s law states that “work expands to 
fill the time available for its completion.” If there are no specified deadlines, it is possible that 
knowledge work will continue to expand.
Just as agile methodologies are an alternative to the SDLC, 
OmniFocus is an alternative to Microsoft Project and other Gantt 
chart or PERT diagram approaches.
A casual observer might think that agile methods are 
unstructured because systems are built without detailed specifics 
and documentation. A student of agile methods realizes that there 
is actually quite a bit of structure in the agile approach. Principles 
include sticking to the 40-hour workweek and coordination through 
pair programming. An analyst who adopts agile techniques needs a 
way to set goals, stay within budget, set priorities for features, and 
find a way to get things done.
OmniFocus is based on an alternative task management 
system by David Allen (2015), called Getting Things Done. The 
overriding principle is to free your mind from remembering things 
so that you can concentrate on completing them. An analyst using 
this system goes through five actions: collect, process, organize, 
review, and do.
A systems analyst using OmniFocus collects items from 
their web browser, address book or calendar, and most other 
applications on a Mac. The analyst can categorize the data or 
assign it to a larger project. OmniFocus contains a planning 
mode so the analyst can see which task is part of a larger project 
and a context mode that organizes the tasks so the analyst knows 
all the tasks that must be done either by phone, by browsing 
the web, or by using email. OmniFocus is also available as an 
iPhone app.
MAC APPEAL
FIGURE 6. MAC
OmniFocus from The Omni Group. (Used by permission of the Omni Group.)


===== BOOK PAGE 197 =====

CHAPTER 6  •  AgilE  ModEling, PR o To TyPing, And SCR uM     197
With traditional structured methodologies, deadlines at first seem far in the future. Analysts 
may use project management techniques to try to schedule the activities, but there is a built-in bias 
to extend earlier tasks longer than they need to be and then try to shorten tasks later on in the devel-
opment. Analysts and coders are less concerned about distant deadlines than approaching ones.
Once again, the agile approach stresses short releases. Releases can be delivered at the time 
promised, minus some of the features originally promised. Making all deadlines imminent pushes 
a realistic expectation for (at least partial) completion to the fore.
Reducing the Data and Knowledge Search and Storage Time and Costs. System developers need to 
gather information about an organization, goals, priorities, and details about current information systems 
before they can proceed to develop a new system. Data-gathering methods include interviewing, 
administration of questionnaires, observation, and investigation by examining reports and memos.
Structured methodologies encourage structured data-gathering methods. Structured 
techniques would normally be used to structure interviews and design the interview process. 
Questionnaires would be developed in a structured way, and structured observational techniques 
such as Structured Observation of the Environment (STROBE) would encourage an analyst to 
specifically observe key elements and form conclusions based on the observations of the physical 
environment. A sampling plan would be determined quantitatively to provide the systems analyst 
with select reports and memos to examine.
Knowledge searches are less structured in an agile modeling environment. The practice of 
having an on-site customer greatly enhances access to information. The on-site customer is present 
to answer questions about the organization itself, its goals, the priorities of organizational members 
and customers, and whatever knowledge is necessary about existing information systems. As the 
project continues, the picture of customer requirements becomes clearer. This approach seems 
relatively painless: When the system developers want to know something, they can just ask. The 
downside, however, is that the on-site representative may make up information if it is unknown 
or unavailable or evade telling the truth for some ulterior purpose.
Reducing Communication and Coordination Time and Costs. Communication between analysts 
and users, as well as among analysts themselves, is at the heart of developing systems. Poor 
communication is certainly at the root of multiple development problems. We know that 
communication increases when more people join a project. When two people work on a project, 
there is one opportunity for a one-to-one conversation; when three people are involved, there are 
three possibilities; when four are involved, there are six possibilities, and so on. Inexperienced 
team members need time to get up to speed, and they can slow down a project even though they 
are meant to help expedite it.
Traditional structured development encourages the separation of big tasks into smaller 
tasks. This allows for more tightly knit groups and decreases the time spent communicating. 
Another approach involves setting up barriers. For example, customers may not be given access 
to programmers. This is a common practice in many industries. However, increased efficiency 
often means decreased effectiveness, and it has been noted that dividing groups and setting up 
barriers often introduces errors.
Agile methods, on the other hand, limit time instead of tasks. Timeboxing is used in agile 
methodologies to encourage completion of activities in shorter periods. Timeboxing is simply setting 
a time limit of one or two weeks to complete a feature or module. The agile method Scrum puts a 
premium on time, and the developers communicate effectively as a team. Communication is one of 
the four values of the agile philosophy, and communication costs tend to increase rather than decrease.
Reducing Losses from Human Information Overload. We have long known that people do not 
react well in information-overload situations. When telephones were an emerging technology, 
switchboard operators manually connected calls between two parties. It was demonstrated that 
this system would work until an information overload occurred, at which point the entire system 
broke down. When too many calls came in, the overwhelmed switchboard operator would simply 
stop working and give up completely on connecting callers. An analogous overload situation can 
occur anytime to anyone, including systems analysts and coders.
A traditional approach would filter information to shield analysts and coders from customer 
complaints. This approach allows developers to continue working on the problem without the 
interference and subjectivity that would normally occur.


===== BOOK PAGE 198 =====

198    PART ii •  inFoRMATion  REQuiREMEnTS AnAly SiS
Using an agile philosophy, analysts and coders are expected to stick to a 40-hour workweek. 
Some might view this as a questionable practice. How will all the work ever get done? The agile 
philosophy states that quality work is usually done during a routine schedule, and it is only when 
overtime is added that problems of poor-quality design and programming enter the scene. By sticking 
to a 40-hour workweek schedule, agile methodology claims that you will eventually come out ahead.
Risks Inherent in Organizational Innovation
In consultation with users, analysts must consider the risks that organizations face when adopting 
new methodologies. Clearly, this is part of a larger question of when the appropriate time is to 
upgrade human skills, adopt new organizational processes, and institute internal change.
In a larger sense, these are questions of a strategic dimension for organizational leadership. 
Specifically, we consider the case of the systems analysis team adopting agile methods in light 
of the risks to the organization and the eventual successful outcome for the systems development 
team and their clients. Figure 6.16 shows many of the variables that need to be considered when 
assessing the risk of adopting organizational innovation.
Organizational Culture. A key consideration in organizational innovation is the overall culture 
of the organization and how the culture of the development team fits within it. A conservative 
organizational culture with many stable features that does not seek to innovate may be an 
inappropriate or even inhospitable context for the adoption of agile methodologies by a systems 
development group. Analysts and other developers must use caution in introducing new techniques 
into this type of setting because their success is far from assured and long-standing development 
team members or other organizational members may be threatened by new ways of working that 
depart from customary, dependable approaches with proven results.
Conversely, an organization that is dependent on innovation to retain its cutting edge in its 
industry might welcome agile innovations in systems development. In this instance, the culture of the 
organization is already permeated with the understanding of the critical nature of many of the core 
principles of agile development methodologies. From the strategic level downward, the company’s 
members have internalized the need for rapid feedback, dynamic responses to changing environments 
in real time, dependence on the customer for guidance and participation in problem solving, and so on.
Located between these extremes are organizations that do not rely on innovation as a key 
strategic strength (in other words, they are not dependent on research and development of new 
products or services to remain afloat) but that might still wish to adopt innovative practices in 
small units or groups. Indeed, such small, innovative centers or kernels might eventually drive the 
growth or competitive advantage of this type of organization. These are appropriate situations for 
a hybrid approach of combining agile methods with SDLC processes.
FIGURE 6.16
Adopting new information sys-
tems involves balancing several 
risks.
Measuring
Impact Cost
Individual
Rights Timing
Organizational
Culture
Clients’
Reactions
Risks in
Adopting
Organizational
Innovation


===== BOOK PAGE 199 =====

CHAPTER 6  •  AgilE  ModEling, PR o To TyPing, And SCR uM     199
Timing. Organizations must ask and answer the question of when the best time is to innovate 
with the adoption of new systems development methodologies, taking all other projects and fac-
tors (internally and externally) into account. Organizations must consider the entire panoply of 
projects in which they are investing, look ahead at project deadlines, schedule the upgrading of 
physical plants, and absorb key industry and economic forecasts.
Cost. Another risk to the adoption of agile methodologies for organizations is the cost involved 
in education and training of systems analysts and coders in the new approach. This may involve 
either costly off-site seminars and courses or hiring consultants to work with current staff on-site. 
Furthermore, opportunity costs are involved when systems developers are necessarily diverted 
(albeit temporarily) from ongoing projects to learn new skills. Education can be costly, but an 
additional burden is recognized when analysts cannot earn income during their training period.
Clients’ Reactions. When clients (whether internal or external) are involved as users or initiators 
of information systems development efforts, reactions to the use of new methods entailed by the 
agile approach are also a key consideration. Some clients react with joy once the benefits of time-
liness and involvement are described. Others do not want to be used for systems “experiments” 
with uncertain outcomes. The client–analyst relationship must be resilient enough to absorb and 
adapt to changes in expected behaviors. For example, the on-site presence of a client during 
development is a major commitment that should be thoroughly understood and agreed upon by 
those adopting agile methods.
Measuring Impact. Another consideration for organizations adopting agile methodologies is how 
to certify and measure that the new methods are going to facilitate successful systems develop-
ment. The strengths and weaknesses of traditional structured methods used to develop information 
systems are well known.
Although there is ample anecdotal evidence that agile methodologies are superior for 
development under some conditions, their history has been brief in comparison to the SDLC 
approach and the methods are not all empirically supported. Therefore, the adoption of agile 
methodologies carries with it the risk that systems created with them will not be successful 
or will not adequately interface with legacy systems. Measuring the impact of the use of agile 
methodologies has begun, but organizations need to be vigilant in proposing impact measurements 
in tandem with the adoption of new methods.
Individual Rights of Programmers/Analysts. Successful systems developers (analysts and 
programmers) exercise creativity in their approach to their work, and they deserve the right to 
work in the most fruitful configuration possible. It is possible that the working requirements of 
new agile methods (for example, pair programming) encroach upon some basic rights of creative 
people to work alone or in groups as the design work dictates. There is no “one best way” to 
design a system, a module, an interface, a form, or a web page. In the case of systems developers, 
creativity, subjectivity, and the right to achieve design objectives through numerous individual 
paths need to be balanced against the organizational adoption of innovative approaches such as 
agile methodologies.
As you can see, adopting organizational innovations poses many risks to an organization as 
well as to individuals. We have examined the risks to an organization as well as the risks to an 
individual systems analyst involved in the organization’s desire to innovate.
Summary
Prototyping is an information-gathering technique useful for supplementing the traditional SDLC; however, 
both agile methods and human–computer interaction share roots in prototyping. When systems analysts 
use prototyping, they are seeking user reactions, suggestions, innovations, and revision plans to make 
improvements to the prototype, and thereby modify system plans with a minimum of expense and disruption. 
The four major guidelines for developing a prototype are to (1) work in manageable modules, (2) build the 
prototype rapidly, (3) modify the prototype, and (4) stress the user interface.
Agile modeling is a software development approach that defines an overall plan quickly, develops and 
releases software quickly, and then continuously revises software to add additional features. It has become 
the predominant approach to systems development, especially when used in a hybrid manner with selected


===== BOOK PAGE 200 =====

200    PART ii •  inFoRMATion  REQuiREMEnTS AnAly SiS
SDLC processes. The values of the agile approach that are shared by the customer as well as the develop-
ment team are communication, simplicity, feedback, and courage. Agile activities include coding, testing, 
listening, and designing. Resources available include time, cost, quality, and scope.
Agile core practices distinguish agile methods, including a type of agile method called extreme  
programming (XP), from other systems development processes. The four core practices of the agile approach 
are (1) short releases, (2) 40-hour workweek, (3) on-site customer, and (4) pair programming. The agile 
development process includes choosing a task that is directly related to a customer-desired feature based on 
user stories, choosing a programming partner, selecting and writing appropriate test cases, writing the code, 
running the test cases, debugging it until all test cases run, implementing it with the existing design, and 
integrating it into what currently exists.
User stories are casual explanations of a requested software feature expressed in the language of a user. 
They are starting points for interactions between the user and the systems analyst. Each user story should 
stand on its own without other user stories, is negotiable among the project stakeholders, and should focus 
on the user’s requirements and how they relate to business value.
Scrum is an agile method suitable for more complex projects. In the development method Scrum, a 
limited number of features or tasks are selected for completion in a sprint, typically lasting two to four weeks. 
The result of the sprint is a potentially shippable product. Once the sprint ends, the process begins again with 
new priorities and features to be finished in the next sprint. Specific roles are played in Scrum and specific 
actions are taken. Members include designers, coders, a user interface expert, a tester, and someone who 
is a domain expert (who knows about the business and the customer). The product backlog is composed of 
features and other deliverables that designers intend for the product based on user stories. In addition to listing 
features to add to an application, a product backlog also lists bugs to fix or even applications that need to be 
documented. A sprint backlog is created to select the user stories that need to be completed soon. Stories are 
deliverables the team accomplishes. Tasks, on the other hand, are parts of the story or units of work that each 
team members does. The sprint cycle can vary in length, but we find that most companies set two weeks as 
the length of a sprint cycle. That gives the team two weeks to complete work on a few user stories and then 
decide whether the product is ready to be released. Then the cycle begins again.
DevOps (derived from development and operations) is a cultural shift in the organization. It can create 
two approaches in the organization that run on parallel tracks; one track supports developing rapid innovative 
applications, and the other supports the maintenance and operations of those processes already in place.
No-code platforms are springing up where nonprogrammers can drag and drop content onto a 
web page or app without needing to do coding. There are advantages and disadvantages to no-code 
platforms but at minmum they can help in prototyping and as a tool in agile methods. Their popularity 
is on the rise.
Work management systems can be helpful in agile development. An example is Jira software, which 
allows you to create and automate a compendium of user stories from customers and end users called an 
epic. Epics can be used to organize all of the user stories and break down the tasks into release versions.
Systems development life cycle and agile approaches handle improving knowledge work efficiency 
differently. There are several inherent risks to organizations that adopt innovative approaches, including an 
incompatible organizational culture, poor timing of the project, cost of training systems analysts, unfavorable 
client reactions to new behavioral expectations, difficulties in measuring the impact, and the possible 
compromise of the individual creative rights of programmers and analysts.
Keywords and Phrases
40-hour workweek
agile modeling
agile principles
agile values
burndown chart
DevOps
epic
extreme programming (XP)
first-of-a-series prototype
hybrid approach
kanban
no-code
nonoperational prototype
on-site customer
pair programming
patched-up prototype
product backlog
prototype
Scrum 
Scrum planning poker
selected-features prototype
short release
sprint
sprint backlog
sprint review
throughput
user involvement with prototyping
user story
work management systems


===== BOOK PAGE 201 =====

CHAPTER 6  •  AgilE  ModEling, PR o To TyPing, And SCR uM     201
Review Questions
1. What four kinds of information is an analyst seeking through prototyping?
2. What is meant by the term patched-up prototype?
3. Define a prototype that is a nonworking scale model.
4. Give an example of a prototype that is a first full-scale model.
5. Define what is meant by a prototype that is a model with some, but not all, essential features.
6. What are the criteria for deciding whether a system should be prototyped?
7. What are the two main problems identified with prototyping?
8. A hybrid approach combines which two systems development approaches in creating systems?
9. What are the four values that must be shared by the development team and business customers when 
taking an agile approach?
10. What are agile principles? Give five examples.
11. What are the four core practices of the agile approach?
12. Name the four resource control variables used in the agile approach.
13. Outline the typical steps in an agile development episode.
14. What is a user story? Is it primarily written or spoken? State your choice, then defend your answer 
with an example.
15. Why are user stories valuable to the analyst?
16. List software tools that can aid the developer in doing a variety of tests of code.
17. What is Scrum?
18. What are three roles played in Scrum?
19. What are the four actions team members take in Scrum?
20. What should be listed in a product backlog registry?
21. Who needs to understand user stories listed on the product backlog registry?
22. What are two questions the team should ask of itself after a two-week sprint cycle has been completed?
23. What are the nine advantages of Scrum?
24. What are two of the many unique features of Scrum?
25. What are the seven disadvantages of Scrum?
26. What are the four key elements of the kanban system as applied to software development?
27. What does DevOps stand for?
28. What is the Amazon two-pizza rule for determining team size?
29. What two parallel tracks are used for running DevOps?
30. Why is it important to push security of systems to DevOps teams?
31. What is meant by no-code software development?
32. List four advantages of taking a no-code approach to something like development of a web page.
33. List two disadvantages of taking a no-code approach to software development.
34. Give an example of a work management system.
35. What does the word epic mean in the context of user stories?
36. Name the seven strategies for improving efficiency in knowledge work.
37. Identify six risks in adopting organizational innovation.
Problems
1. As part of a larger systems project, Clone Bank of Clone, Colorado, wants your help in setting up a 
new monthly reporting form for its deposit account and savings account customers. The president and 
vice presidents are very attuned to what customers in the community are saying. They believe their 
customers want a deposit account summary that looks like the one offered by the other three banks 
in town. They are unwilling, however, to commit to that form without a formal summary of customer 
feedback that supports their decision. Feedback will not be used to change the prototype form in 
any way. They want you to send a prototype of one form to one group and to send the old form to 
another group.
a. In a paragraph, discuss why it probably is not worthwhile to prototype the new form under these 
circumstances.
b. In a second paragraph, discuss a situation under which it would be advisable to prototype a 
new form.
2. Kalana “Kal” Malimage has been a systems analyst for Conventional Corporation for many years. 
When you came on board as part of the systems analysis team and suggested prototyping as part of 
the SDLC for a current project, Kal said, “Sure, but you can’t pay any attention to what users say. 
They have no idea what they want. I’ll prototype, but I’m not ‘observing’ any users.”


===== BOOK PAGE 202 =====

202    PART ii •  inFoRMATion  REQuiREMEnTS AnAly SiS
a. As tactfully as possible, so as not to upset Kal, make a list of the reasons that support the 
importance of observing user reactions, suggestions, and innovations in the prototyping process.
b. In a paragraph, describe what might happen if part of a system is prototyped and no user feedback 
about it is incorporated into the successive system.
3. “Every time I think I’ve captured user information requirements, they’ve already changed. It’s like 
trying to hit a moving target. Half the time, I don’t think they even know what they want themselves,” 
exclaims Flo Chart, a systems analyst for 2 Good 2 Be True, a company that surveys product use for 
the marketing divisions of several manufacturing companies.
a. In a paragraph, explain to Flo how prototyping can help her to better define users’ information 
requirements.
b. In a paragraph, comment on Flo’s observation: “Half the time, I don’t think they even know 
what they want themselves.” Be sure to explain how prototyping can actually help users better 
understand and articulate their own information requirements.
c. In a paragraph, suggest how an interactive website featuring a prototype might address Flo’s 
concerns about capturing user information requirements.
4. Dustin Ormand, a district manager for the multioutlet chain Sprocket’s Gifts, thinks that building 
a prototype can mean only one thing: a nonworking scale model. He also believes that this is too 
cumbersome to successfully prototype information systems and thus is reluctant to do so.
a. Briefly (in two or three paragraphs) compare and contrast the other three kinds of prototyping  
that are possible so that Dustin understands what prototyping can mean.
b. Dustin has an option of implementing one system, trying it, and then having it installed in five 
other Sprocket locations if it is successful. Name a type of prototyping that would fit well with 
this approach, and in a paragraph defend your choice.
5. “I’ve got the idea of the century!” proclaims Farahnaz Sadoughi, a new systems analyst with your 
systems group. “Let’s skip all this SDLC nonsense and just prototype everything. Our projects 
will go a lot more quickly, we’ll save time and money, and all the users will feel as if we’re paying 
attention to them instead of going away for months on end and not talking to them.”
a. List the reasons you (as a member of the same team as Farahnaz) would give to dissuade Farahnaz 
from trying to scrap the SDLC and prototype every project.
b. Farahnaz is pretty disappointed with what you have said. To encourage her, in a paragraph, explain 
the situations you think would lend themselves to prototyping.
6. The following remark was overheard at a meeting between managers and a systems analysis team at 
the Fence-Me-In fencing company: “You told us the prototype would be finished three weeks ago. 
We’re still waiting for it!”
a. In a paragraph, comment on the importance of rapid delivery of a portion of a prototyped 
information system.
b. List three elements of the prototyping process that must be controlled to ensure prompt delivery of 
the prototype.
c. What are some elements of the prototyping process that are difficult to manage? List them.
7. Prepare a list of activities for a systems development team for an online travel agent that is setting up 
a website for customers. Now suppose you are running out of time. Describe some of your options. 
Describe what you will trade off to get the website released in time.
8. Given the situation for Williwonk’s chocolates (Problem 1 in Chapter 3), which of the four agile 
modeling resource variables may be adjusted?
9. Examine the collection of user stories from the online merchant shown earlier in the chapter. The 
online media store would now like to have you add some features to its website. Following the format 
shown in Figure 6.4, write a user story for these features:
a. Include pop-up ads.
b. Offer to share the details of the customer’s purchases with their friends.
c. Extend offer to purchase other items.
10. Go to the Android website www.palmgear.com. Explore the website and write up a dozen brief user 
stories for improving the website.
11. Go to the iTunes website and write up a dozen brief user stories for improving the website.
12. Using the stories you wrote for Problem 9, walk through the five stages of the agile development 
methodology and describe what happens at each one of the stages.
Group Projects
1. Divide your group into two smaller subgroups. Have Group 1 follow the processes specified in this 
chapter for creating prototypes. Using a CASE tool or a word processor, Group 1 should devise 
two nonworking prototype screens using the information collected in the interviews with Maverick


===== BOOK PAGE 203 =====

CHAPTER 6  •  AgilE  ModEling, PR o To TyPing, And SCR uM     203
Transport employees accomplished in the group exercise in Chapter 4. Make any assumptions 
necessary to create two screens for truck dispatchers. Group 2 (playing the roles of dispatchers) 
should react to the prototype screens and provide feedback about desired additions and deletions.
2. The members of Group 1 should revise the prototype screens based on the user comments they 
received. Those in Group 2 should respond with comments about how well their initial concerns were 
addressed with the refined prototypes.
3. As a united group, write a paragraph discussing your experiences with prototyping for ascertaining 
information requirements.
4. Within your united group, assign some of the roles that people take on in agile development. 
Make sure that one person is an on-site customer and at least two people are programmers. 
Assign other roles as you see fit. Simulate the systems development situation discussed in 
Problem 7 or have the person acting as the on-site customer choose an ecommerce business with 
which they are familiar. Assume that the customer wants to add some functionality to the website. 
Role-play a scenario showing what each person would do if this was being approached through 
agile methods. Write a paragraph that discusses the constraints that each person faces in enacting 
their role.
Selected Bibliography
Alaidros, H., Omar, M., & Romli, R. (2021). The state of the art of agile kanban method: Challenges and 
opportunities. Independent Journal of Management & Production, 12(8), 2535–2550.
Alavi, M. (1984). An assessment of the prototyping approach to information systems development. 
Communications of the ACM, 27(6), 556–563.
Allen, D. (2015). Getting things done. Penguin.
Altassian.com and https://support.atlassian.com/jira-software-cloud/docs/what-is-the-jira-family-of- 
products/
Avison, D., & Wilson, D. N. (1991). Controls for effective prototyping. Journal of Management Systems, 
3(1), 52–62.
Beck, K. (2000). Extreme programming explained: Embrace change. Addison-Wesley.
Beck, K., & Fowler, M. (2001). Planning extreme programming. Addison-Wesley, 2001.
Cockburn, A. (2002). Agile software development. Addison-Wesley.
Cohn, M. (n.d.). User stories. https:/www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/agile/user-stories.
Davis, G. B., & Naumann, J. D. (1999). Knowledge work productivity. In K. E. Kendall (Ed.), Emerging 
information technologies: Improving decisions, cooperation, and infrastructure (pp. 343–357). Sage.
Davis, G. B., & Olson, M. H. (1985). Management information systems: Conceptual foundations, 
structure, and development (2nd ed.). McGraw-Hill.
Dimitrijević, D., Jovanović, J., & Devedžić, V . (2015). A comparative study of software tools for user 
story management. Information and Software Technology, 57, 352–368.
Dorosz-Zurkowska, K. (2019, September 10). How to write user stories that work in Jira? [Blog post]. 
https://deviniti.com/blog/enterprise-software/how-to-create-user-stories-in-jira/
Fitzgerald, B., & Hartnett, G. (2005). A study of the use of agile methods within Intel. In L. Matthiassen, 
J. Pries-Heje, & J. DeGross (Eds.), Business agility and IT diffusion (pp. 187–202). Springer.
Grehan, R. (2010, May 12). InfoWorld Review: Tools for web development. InfoWorld. https://www. 
networkworld.com/article/2209260/software/infoworld-review--tools-for-rapid-web-development.html
Gremillion, L. L., & Pyburn, P. (1983, March–April). Breaking the systems development bottleneck. 
Harvard Business Review, pp. 130–137.
Harrison, T. S. (1985). Techniques and issues in rapid prototyping. Journal of Systems Management, 
36(6), 8–13.
Kendall, J. E., & Kendall, K. E. (2004–2005). Agile methodologies and the lone systems analyst: When 
individual creativity and organizational goals collide in the global IT environment. Journal of 
Individual Employment Rights, 11(4), 333–347.
Kendall, J. E., Kendall, K. E., & Kong, S. (2006). Improving quality through the use of agile methods in 
systems development: People and values in the quest for quality. In E. W. Duggan and H. Reichgelt 
(Eds.), Measuring information systems delivery quality (pp. 201–222). Idea Group.
Loukides, M. (2012). What is DevOps? (Kindle ed.). O’Reilly Media.
McBreen, P. (2003). Questioning extreme programming. Addison-Wesley.
Naumann, J. D., & Jenkins, A. M. (1982). Prototyping: The new paradigm for systems development.  
MIS Quarterly, 6(3), 29–44.
Sandler, R. (2018). Here’s how to use Airtable, the user-friendly spreadsheet app that’s taking Silicon 
Valley by storm. Business Insider India. https://www.businessinsider.in/heres-how-to-use-airtable-
the-user-friendly-spreadsheet-app-thats-taking-silicon-valley-by-storm/articleshow/63523870.cms


===== BOOK PAGE 204 =====

204    PART ii •  inFoRMATion  REQuiREMEnTS AnAly SiS
Soares, H. F., Alves, N. S. R., Mendes, T. S. Mendonca, M. G., & Oliveira, R. (2015, April). Investigating 
the link between user stories and documentation debt on software projects. Paper presented at the 
12th International Conference on Information Technology – New Generations, Las Vegas. https://
www.computer.org/csdl/proceedings/itng/2015/12OmNvmowTr
Tech World. (2017). DevOps handbook: A guide to implementing DevOps in your workplace (Kindle ed.). 
WorldTech.
Vii, P. (2016). Agile product management: Kanban: The kanban guide (2nd ed.). Pashun Consulting.


===== BOOK PAGE 205 =====

Paul Noth/The New Yorker Collection/The Cartoon Bank
The Analysis Process
PART  
III


===== BOOK PAGE 206 =====

206
Using Data Flow Diagrams
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1 Comprehend the importance of using data flow diagrams (DFDs) to better understand the 
needs of system users.
2 Learn how to develop DFDs by identifying external entities, data flows, processes, and 
data stores.
3 Be able to create both logical DFDs and physical DFDs.
4 Realize all of the steps it takes to develop a DFD by studying an example from start to 
finish.
5 Understand and apply the concept of partitioning websites.
6 Learn how to communicate with users and others by developing and sharing DFDs.
A systems analyst needs to make use of the conceptual freedom afforded by data flow 
diagrams (DFDs), which graphically characterize data processes and flows in a business 
system. In their original state, DFDs depict the broadest possible overview of system 
inputs, processes, and outputs, which correspond to those of the general systems model 
discussed in Chapter 2. A series of layered DFDs may be used to represent and analyze 
detailed procedures in the larger system. The data flow approach has four chief advantages 
over narrative explanations of the way data move through the system: (1) freedom from 
committing to the technical implementation of the system too early, (2) further understanding 
of the interrelatedness of systems and subsystems, (3) communicating current system 
knowledge to users through DFDs, and (4) analysis of a proposed system to determine 
whether the necessary data and processes have been defined.
7
CHAPTER

