
===== BOOK PAGE 260 =====

260    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
OVERVIEW OF PROCESS SPECIFICATIONS
To determine the human information requirements of a decision analysis strategy, a systems 
analyst must first determine the users’ objectives, along with the organization’s objectives, using 
either a top-down approach or an object-oriented approach. The systems analyst must understand 
the principles of organizations and have a working knowledge of data-gathering techniques. The 
top-down approach is critical because all human decisions in the organization should be related, 
at least indirectly, to the broad objectives of the entire organization.
Process specifications—sometimes called mini specs because they are a small portion of 
the total project specifications—are created for primitive processes on a data flow diagram as 
well as for some higher-level processes that explode to a child diagram. They also may be created 
for class methods in object-oriented design and, in a more general sense, for the steps in a use 
case (as discussed in Chapters 2 and 10). These specifications explain the decision-making logic 
and formulas that will transform process input data into output. Each derived element must have 
process logic to show how it is produced from the base elements or other previously created 
derived elements that are input to the primitive process.
The three goals of producing process specifications are as follows:
1. To reduce the ambiguity of the process. This goal compels the analyst to learn details about 
how the process works. Any vague areas should be noted, written down, and consolidated 
for all process specifications. These observations form a basis and provide the questions for 
follow-up interviews with the user community.
2. To obtain a precise description of what is accomplished. This is usually included in a 
packet of specifications for the programmer.
3. To validate the system design. This goal includes ensuring that a process has all the input 
data flow necessary for producing the output. In addition, all input and output must be 
represented on the data flow diagram.
You will find many situations in which process specifications are not created. Sometimes 
the process is very simple or the computer code already exists. This eventuality would be noted 
in the process description, and no further design would be required. Categories of processes that 
generally do not require specifications are as follows:
1. Processes that represent physical input or output, such as read and write. These processes 
usually require only simple logic.
way. As implied in the video, as a systems analyst making tough per-
sonal and career decisions, you need to recognize decision making 
as a process and identify opportunity costs, look out for psychologi-
cal errors like anchoring and sunk costs, learn from past choices, and 
watch out for ethical pitfalls present in your decision alternatives by 
asking good questions. After you view the video, please reflect on 
the following questions:
1. How does time enter into the process of decision making?
2. Why does it make sense to narrow one’s choices before 
weighing the opportunity costs of each alternative?
3. Once you have a set of decision alternatives where you have 
examined opportunity costs, what are some ways to further 
narrow your list of choices?
4. Many decision alternatives present ethical pitfalls. What are 
some ways to avoid those mishaps in your personal decision 
making?
SYSTEMS SCENARIO  
Shaping Structured and Unstructured Decisions
This chapter examines the purpose of developing process specifica-
tions for documenting decisions in a system. It also discusses the 
difference between structured and unstructured decisions. In this 
video, the topic of making tough personal decisions, most of them 
unstructured rather than structured, is explored in an entertaining 
To view the video for this scenario,  
see eText Chapter 9.
Crash Course Business Soft 
Skills/Boclips


===== BOOK PAGE 261 =====

CHAPTER 9  •  PROCESS  SPECIfICATIONS  AND  S TR uCTuRED  DECISIONS      261
2. Processes that represent simple data validation, which is usually fairly easy to accomplish. 
The edit criteria are included in the data dictionary and incorporated in the computer 
source code. Process specifications may be produced for complex editing.
3. Processes that use prewritten code. These processes are generally included in a system 
as procedures, methods, and functions or in class libraries (that are either purchased or 
available free on the web).
These blocks are computer program code that is stored on the computer system. They usually 
perform a general system function, such as validating a date or a check digit. These general-
purpose subprograms are written and documented only once but form a series of building blocks 
that may be used in many systems throughout the organization. Thus, these subprograms appear 
as processes on many data flow diagrams (or as class methods, discussed in Chapter 10).
Process Specification Format
Process specifications link a process to a data flow diagram, and hence a data dictionary, as 
illustrated in Figure 9.1. Each process specification should be entered on a separate form or into 
a CASE (computer-assisted software engineering) tool screen such as the one used by the CASE 
tool Visible Analyst. Enter the following information:
1. The process number, which must match the process ID on the data flow diagram. This 
specification allows an analyst to work on or review any process and to locate the data flow 
diagram containing the process easily.
2. The process name, which must be the same as the name displayed in the process symbol on 
the data flow diagram.
3. A brief description of what the process accomplishes.
4. A list of input data flows, using the names found on the data flow diagram. Data names 
used in the formula or logic should match those in the data dictionary to ensure consistency 
and good communication.
5. The output data flows, also using the data flow diagram and data dictionary names.
6. An indication of the type of process: batch, online, or manual. All online processes 
require screen designs, and all manual processes should have well-defined procedures 
for employees performing the process tasks.
Halloween treat bags, holiday cookie cutters, or Valentine’s Day 
cake molds) and the backorder date is 30 days or more, though, we 
send out a notice with a chef glaring at her egg timer.
“If the backorder date changed at all and we haven’t sent out a 
card in the last two weeks, we send out a card with a chef checking 
her recipe. If the merchandise is no longer available, we send a 
notice (complete with chef crying in the corner) and delete the 
record. We haven’t begun to use email in place of mailed cards, 
but I’d like to.
“Thanks for listening to all this. I think we’ve got the right 
ingredients for a good policy; we just need to blend them together 
and cook up something special.”
You are the systems analyst Kit hired. Go through the narrative 
of how Kit Chen Kaboodle, Inc. handles unfilled orders, drawing 
boxes around each action Kit mentions and circling each condition 
brought up. Make a list of any ambiguities you would like to clarify 
in a later interview, and then write five questions to address them.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 9.1 
Kit Chen Kaboodle, Inc.
“I don’t want to get anyone stirred up, but I think we need to 
sift through our unfilled order policies,” says Kit Chen. “I wouldn’t 
want to put a strain on our customers. As you know already, 
Kit Chen Kaboodle is a web and mail-order cookware business 
specializing in ‘klassy kitsch for kitchens,’ as our latest cata-
log says. I mean, we’ve got everything you need to do gourmet 
cooking and entertaining: nutmeg grinders, potato whisks, egg sep-
arators, turkey basters, placemats with cats on ’em, ice cube trays 
in shamrock shapes, and more.
“Here’s how we’ve been handling unfilled orders. We search our 
unfilled orders file from the internet as well as mail-order sales once 
a week. If the order was filled this week, we delete the record, and 
the rest is gravy. If we haven’t written to the customer in four weeks, 
we send ’em this cute card with a chef peeking into the oven, saying, 
‘Not ready yet.’ It’s a notification that their item is still on backorder.
“If the backorder date changed to greater than 45 days from 
now, we send out a notice. If the merchandise is seasonal (as with


===== BOOK PAGE 262 =====

262    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
7. If the process uses prewritten code, include the name of the subprogram or function 
containing that code.
8. A description of the process logic that states policy and business rules in everyday language, 
not computer language pseudo-code. Business rules are the procedures, or perhaps a set of 
conditions or formulas, that allow a corporation to run its business. The early problem defi-
nition (as explained in Chapter 3) that you completed initially may provide a starting place 
for this description. Common business rule formats include the following:
• Definitions of business terms
• Business conditions and actions
• Data integrity constraints
• Mathematical and functional derivations
• Logical inferences
• Processing sequences
• Relationships among facts about the business
9. If there is not enough room on the form for a complete structured English description,  
or if there is a decision table or tree depicting the logic, include the corresponding table or 
tree name.
10. A list of any unresolved issues, incomplete portions of logic, or other concerns. These 
issues form the basis of the questions used for follow-up interviews with users or business 
experts you have added to your project team.
These items should be entered to complete a process specification form, which includes a process 
number, process name, or both from the data flow diagram, as well as the eight other items shown 
in the World’s Trend example (Figure 9.2). Notice that completing this form thoroughly facilitates 
linking the process to the data flow diagram and the data dictionary.
STRUCTURED ENGLISH
When process logic involves formulas or iteration, or when structured decisions are not complex, 
an appropriate technique for analyzing the decision process is the use of structured English. As 
the name implies, structured English is based on (1) structured logic, or instructions organized 
FIGURE 9.1
How process specifications relate 
to a data flow diagram.
Decision
Table
Process
Speciﬁcation
Form
Decision
Tree
Rules
X
P
Q
T
20 40
5010
30
Process
Data Flow Diagram Process Speciﬁcation and Logic
Structured
English
2' 3' 4'1'
Y
Y Y Y
X
X
X
N
N
IF construction
THEN deduc
 ENDIF
IF replacement
THEN add 1
 ENDIF
IF owner choose
THEN add 1
 ENDIF


===== BOOK PAGE 263 =====

CHAPTER 9  •  PROCESS  SPECIfICATIONS  AND  S TR uCTuRED  DECISIONS      263
into nested and grouped procedures, and (2) simple English statements such as add, multiply, and 
move. A word problem can be transformed into structured English by putting the decision rules 
into their proper sequence and using the convention of IF-THEN-ELSE statements throughout.
Writing Structured English
To write structured English, you may want to use the following conventions:
1. Express all logic in terms of one of these four types: sequential structures, decision 
structures, case structures, or iterations (see Figure 9.3 for examples).
2. Use and capitalize accepted keywords such as IF, THEN, ELSE, DO, DO WHILE,  
DO UNTIL, and PERFORM.
3. Indent blocks of statements to show their hierarchy (nesting) clearly.
FIGURE 9.2
An example of a completed 
process specification form for 
determining whether an item is 
available.
Process Speciﬁcation Form
Number
Name
Description
Input Data Flow
Output Data Flow
Type of Process
Online Batch Manual
Subprogram/Function Name
Process Logic:
Refer to: Name:
Structured English Decision Table Decision Tree
Unresolved Issues:
1.3
Determine Quantity Available
Determine if an item is available for sale. If it is not available, create a backordered
item record. Determine the quantity available.
Valid item from Process 1.2
Quantity on Hand from Item Record
Available Item (Item Number + Quantity Sold) to Processes 1.4 & 1.5
Backordered item to Inventory Control
IF the Order Item Quantity is greater than Quantity on Hand
      Then Move Order Item Quantity to Available Item Quantity
                 Move Order Item Number to Available Item Number
ELSE
      Subtract Quantity on Hand from Order Item Quantity
                giving Quantity Backordered
      Move Quantity Backordered to Backordered Item Record
      Move Item Number to Backordered Item Record
      DO write Backordered Record
      Move Quantity on Hand to Available Item Quantity
      Move Order Item Number to Available Item Number
ENDIF
Should the amount that is on order for this item be taken into account?
Would this, combined with the expected arrival date of goods on order , change how the quantity
available is calculated?


===== BOOK PAGE 264 =====

264    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
4. When words or phrases have been defined in a data dictionary (as in Chapter 8), underline 
those words or phrases to signify that they have a specialized, reserved meaning.
5. Be careful when using “and” and “or,” and avoid confusion when distinguishing between 
“greater than” and “greater than or equal to” and similar relationships. “A and B” means 
both A and B, “A or B” means either A or B, but not both. Clarify the logical statements 
now rather than waiting until the program coding stage.
A Structured English Example. The following example demonstrates how a spoken procedure for 
processing medical claims is transformed into structured English:
We process all our claims in this manner. First, we determine whether the claimant has 
ever sent in a claim before; if not, we set up a new record. The claim totals for the year are 
then updated. Next, we determine if a claimant has policy A or policy B, which differ in 
deductibles and copayments (the percentage of the claim claimants pay themselves). For 
both policies, we check to see if the deductible has been met ($100 for policy A and $50 
for policy B). If the deductible has not been met, we apply the claim to the deductible. 
Another step adjusts for the copayment; we subtract the percentage the claimant pays 
(40 percent for policy A and 60 percent for policy B) from the claim. Then we issue a 
check if there is money coming to the claimant, print a summary of the transaction, and 
update our accounts. We do this until all claims for that day are processed.
into a new mold by rewriting the recipe for handling unfilled orders 
in structured English. In a paragraph, describe how this process 
might change if you used email for notification rather than regular 
mail sent by post.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 9.2 
Kneading Structure
Kit Chen has risen to the occasion and answered your ques-
tions concerning the policy for handling unfilled orders at Kit Chen 
Kaboodle, Inc. Based on those answers and any assumptions you 
need to make, pour Kit’s narrative (from Consulting Opportunity 9.1) 
FIGURE 9.3
Examples of logic expressed in 
a sequential structure, a decision 
structure, a case structure, and an 
iteration.
Structured English Type
Sequential Structure
    A block of instructions in which no
    branching occurs
Action #1
Action #2
Action #3
IF Condition A is True
    THEN implement Action A
ELSE implement Action B
ENDIF
IF Case #1 Implement Action #1
ELSE  IF Case #2
          Implement Action #2
ELSE  IF Case #3     
          Implement Action #3
ELSE  IF Case #4
 Implement Action #4
ELSE  print error
ENDIF
Decision Structure
    Only IF a condition is true,
    complete the following
    statements; otherwise, jump to the
    ELSE
Case Structure
    A special type of decision
    structure in which the cases are
    mutually exclusive (if one occurs,
    the others cannot)
Iteration
    Blocks of statements that are
    repeated until done
DO WHILE there are customers.
Action #1
ENDDO
Example


===== BOOK PAGE 265 =====

CHAPTER 9  •  PROCESS  SPECIfICATIONS  AND  S TR uCTuRED  DECISIONS      265
In examining the foregoing statements, we notice some simple sequence structures, particu-
larly at the beginning and end. There are a couple of decision structures, and it is most appropriate 
to nest them, first by determining which policy (A or B) to use and then by subtracting the correct 
deductibles and copayments. The last sentence points to an iteration: Either DO UNTIL all the 
claims are processed or DO WHILE there are claims remaining.
Realizing that it is possible to nest the decision structures according to policy plans, we can 
write the structured English for the foregoing example (see Figure 9.4). As we begin to work on 
the structured English, we find that some logic and relationships that seemed clear at one time 
are actually ambiguous. For example, do we add the claim to the year-to-date claim before or 
after updating the deductible? Is it possible that an error can occur if something other than policy 
A or B is stored in the claimant’s record? We subtract 40 percent of what from the claim? These 
ambiguities need to be clarified at this point.
Besides the obvious advantage of clarifying the logic and relationships found in human lan-
guages, structured English has another important advantage: it is a communication tool. Structured 
English can be taught to and hence understood by users in the organization, so if communication 
is important, structured English is a viable alternative for decision analysis.
Data Dictionary and Process Specifications
All computer programs may be coded using the three basic constructs: sequence, selection 
(IF . . . THEN . . . ELSE and the case structure), and iteration or looping. The data dictionary 
indicates which of these constructs must be included in the process specifications.
If the data dictionary for the input and output data flow contains a series of fields without 
any iteration—{ }—or selection—[ ]—the process specification will contain a simple sequence 
of statements, such as MOVE, ADD, and SUBTRACT. Refer to the example of a data dictionary 
FIGURE 9.4
Structured English for the 
medical-claim processing system. 
Underlining signifies that the 
terms have been defined in the 
data dictionary.
DO WHILE there are claims remaining
   IF claimant has not sent in a claim
      THEN set up new claimant record
   ELSE continue
Add claim to YTD Claim
   IF claimant has policy–plan A
      THEN IF deductible of $100.00 has not been met
            THEN subtract deductible–not–met from claim
            Update deductible
         ELSE continue
         ENDIF
         Subtract copayment of 40% of claim from claim
   ELSE IF claimant has policy–plan B.
         THEN IF deductible of $50.00 has not been met
              THEN subtract deductible–not–met from claim
              Update deductible
           ELSE continue
           ENDIF
           Subtract copayment of 60% of claim from claim
        ELSE continue
     ELSE write plan–error–message
     ENDIF
  ENDIF
  IF claim is greater than zero
     THEN print check
  ENDIF
  Print summary for claimant
  Update accounts
ENDDO


===== BOOK PAGE 266 =====

266    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
for the SHIPPING STATEMENT illustrated in Figure 9.5. Notice that the data dictionary for 
the SHIPPING STATEMENT has the ORDER NUMBER, ORDER DATE, and CUSTOMER 
NUMBER as simple sequential fields. The corresponding logic, shown in lines 3 through 5 in the 
corresponding structured English in Figure 9.6, consists of simple MOVE statements.
A data structure with optional elements contained in parentheses or either/or elements con-
tained in brackets will have a corresponding IF . . . THEN . . . ELSE statement in the process 
specification. Also, if an amount, such as QUANTITY BACKORDERED, is greater than zero, the 
underlying logic will be IF . . . THEN . . . ELSE. Iteration, indicated by braces on a data structure, 
must have a corresponding DO WHILE, DO UNTIL, or PERFORM UNTIL to control looping 
on the process specification. The data structure for the ORDER ITEM LINES allows up to five 
items in the loop. Lines 8 through 17 show the statements contained in the DO WHILE through 
the END DO necessary to produce the multiple ORDER ITEM LINES.
DECISION TABLES
A decision table  is a table of rows and columns, separated into four quadrants, as shown in 
Figure 9.7. The upper-left quadrant contains the condition(s); the upper-right quadrant contains 
the condition alternatives. The lower half of the table contains the actions to be taken on the left 
and the rules for executing the actions on the right. When a decision table is used to determine 
which action needs to be taken, the logic moves clockwise, beginning from the upper left.
Suppose a store wanted to illustrate its policy on noncash customer purchases. The company 
could do so using a simple decision table, as shown in Figure 9.8. Each of the three conditions 
FIGURE 9.5
Data structure for a shipping 
statement for World’s Trend.
Shipping Statement = Order Number +
Order Date +
Customer Number +
Customer Name +
Customer Address +
5 {Order Item Lines} +
Number of Items +
Merchandise Total +
(Tax) +
Shipping and Handling +
Order Total 
First Name +
(Middle Initial) +
Last Name 
Street +
(Apartment) +
City +
State +
Zip +
(Zip Expansion) +
(Country) 
Item Number +
Quantity Ordered +
Quantity Backordered +
Item Description +
Size Description +
Color Description +
Unit Price +
Extended Amount 
Customer Name =
Address =
Order Item Lines =
1


===== BOOK PAGE 267 =====

CHAPTER 9  •  PROCESS  SPECIfICATIONS  AND  S TR uCTuRED  DECISIONS      267
(sale under $50, pays by check, and uses credit cards) has only two alternatives. The two alterna-
tives are Y (yes, it is true) or N (no, it is not true). Four actions are possible:
1. Complete the sale after verifying the signature.
2. Complete the sale. No signature needed.
3. Call the supervisor for approval.
4. Communicate electronically with the bank for credit card authorization.
The final ingredient that makes the decision table worthwhile is the set of rules for each of 
the actions. Rules are the combinations of the condition alternatives that precipitate an action. 
For example, Rule 3 says:
IF N (the total sale is NOT under $50.00)
AND
IF Y (the customer paid by check and had two forms of ID)
AND
IF N (the customer did not use a credit card)
THEN
DO X (call the supervisor for approval).
The foregoing example features a problem with four sets of rules and four possible actions, 
but that is only a coincidence. The next example demonstrates that decision tables often become 
large and involved.
FIGURE 9.6
Structured English for creating 
the shipping statement for World’s 
Trend.
Structured English
Format the Shipping Statement.  After each line of the statement has been
formatted, write the shipping line.
1.     GET Order Record
2.     GET Customer Record
3.     Move Order Number to Shipping Statement
4.     Move Order Date to Shipping Statement
5.     Move Customer Number to Shipping Statement
6.     DO format Customer Name (leave only one space between First/Middle/Last)
7.     DO format Customer Address lines
8.     DO WHILE there are items for the order
9.              GET Item Record
10.              DO Format Item Line
11.              Multiply Unit Price by Quantity Ordered giving Extended Amount
12.              Move Extended Amount to Order Item Lines
13.              Add Extended Amount to Merchandise Total
14.              IF Quantity Backordered is greater than zero
15.                      Move Quantity Backordered to Order Item Lines
16.              ENDIF
17.     ENDDO
18.     Move Merchandise Total to Shipping Statement
19.     Move 0 to Tax
20.     IF State is equal to CT
21.              Multiply Merchandise Total by Tax Rate giving Tax
22.     ENDIF
23.     Move Tax to Shipping Statement
24.     DO calculate Shipping and Handling
25.     Move Shipping and Handling to Shipping Statement
26.     Add Merchandise Total, Tax, and Shipping and Handling giving Order Total
27.     Move Order Total to Shipping Statement


===== BOOK PAGE 268 =====

268    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
Developing Decision Tables
To build decision tables, an analyst needs to determine the maximum size of the table; eliminate 
any impossible situations, inconsistencies, or redundancies; and simplify the table as much as pos-
sible. The following steps provide the analyst with a systematic method for developing decision 
tables:
1. Determine the number of conditions that may affect the decision. Combine rows that 
overlap, such as conditions that are mutually exclusive. The number of conditions becomes 
the number of rows in the top half of the decision table.
2. Determine the number of possible actions that can be taken. That number becomes the 
number of rows in the lower half of the decision table.
3. Determine the number of condition alternatives for each condition. In the simplest form 
of a decision table, there would be two alternatives (Y or N) for each condition. In an 
extended-entry table, there may be many alternatives for each condition. Make sure that 
all possible values for the condition are included. For example, if a problem statement 
calculating a customer discount mentions one range of values for an order total from $100 
to $1,000 and another range for greater than $1,000, the analyst should realize that the 
range from 0 up to $100 should also be added as a condition. This is especially true when 
there are other conditions that may apply to the 0 up to $100 order total.
4. Calculate the maximum number of columns in the decision table by multiplying the 
number of alternatives for each condition. If there were four conditions and two alterna-
tives (Y or N) for each of the conditions, there would be 16 possibilities, as follows:
×
×
×
×
Conditio n1:2 alternatives
Conditio n2 :2 alternatives
Conditio n3 :2 alternatives
Conditio n4 :2 alternatives
16 possib ilitie s
5. Fill in the condition alternatives. Start with the first condition and divide the number of 
columns by the number of alternatives for that condition. In the foregoing example, there 
FIGURE 9.8
Using a decision table for 
illustrating a store’s policy of 
customer checkout with four sets 
of rules and four possible actions.
Conditions and Actions
Under $50
Pays by check with two forms of ID
Uses credit card
Complete the sale after verifying signature.
Complete the sale. No signature needed.
Call supervisor for approval.
Communicate electronically with bank for credit card authorization.
Rules
1
Y Y N N
Y N Y N
N
X
Y
X
N
X
Y
X
2 3 4
FIGURE 9.7
The standard format used for 
presenting a decision table.
Conditions and Actions
Conditions
Actions
Rules
Condition Alternatives
Action Entries


===== BOOK PAGE 269 =====

CHAPTER 9  •  PROCESS  SPECIfICATIONS  AND  S TR uCTuRED  DECISIONS      269
are 16 columns and two alternatives (Y or N), so 16 divided by 2 is 8. Then choose one 
of the alternatives, say Y , and write it in the first eight columns. Finish by writing N in the 
remaining eight columns, as follows:
Condition 1: Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N N N N N N N
Repeat this step for each condition, using a subset of the table:
Condition 1: Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N N N N N N N
Condition 2: Y Y Y Y N N N N
Condition 3: Y Y N N
Condition 4: Y N
And continue the pattern for each condition:
Condition 1: Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N N N N N N N
Condition 2: Y Y Y Y N N N N Y Y Y Y N N N N
Condition 3: Y Y N N Y Y N N Y Y N N Y Y N N
Condition 4: Y N Y N Y N Y N Y N Y N Y N Y N
6. Complete the table by inserting an X where rules suggest certain actions.
7. Combine rules where it is apparent that an alternative does not make a difference in the 
outcome. For example,
Condition 1: YY
Condition 2: YN
Action 1: XX
can be expressed as:
Condition 1: Y
Condition 2: —
Action 1: X
The dash [—] signifies that Condition 2 can be either Y or N, and the action will still 
be taken.
upgrade from their reserved car size if their company has an account 
with us. There’s a discount for membership in any of the frequent-
flyer clubs run by cooperating airlines too. When customers step up 
to the counter, they tell us what size car they reserved, and then we 
check to see if we have it in the lot ready to go. They usually bring 
up any discounts, and we ask them if they want insurance and how 
long they will use the car. Then we calculate their rate and write out 
a slip for them to sign right there.”
Ricardo has asked you to computerize the billing process 
for Citron so that customers can get their cars quickly and still be 
billed correctly. Draw a decision table that represents the conditions, 
condition alternatives, actions, and action rules you gained from 
Ricardo’s narrative that will guide an automated billing process.
Ricardo wants to expand the ecommerce portion of his business 
by making it possible to reserve a car online. Draw an updated decision 
table that shows a 10 percent discount for booking a car over the web.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 9.3 
Saving a Cent on Citron Car Rental
“We feel lucky to be this popular. I think customers feel we 
have so many options to offer that they ought to rent an auto from 
us,” says Ricardo Limon, who manages several outlets for Citron 
Car Rental. “Our slogan is, ‘You’ll never feel squeezed at Citron.’ 
We have five sizes of cars that we list as A through E:
A Subcompact
B Compact
C Midsize
D Full-size
E Luxury
“Standard transmission is available only for A, B, and C. 
Automatic transmission is available for all cars.”
“If a customer reserves a subcompact (A) and finds on arriving 
that we don’t have one, that customer gets a free upgrade to the 
next-sized car, in this case, a compact (B). Customers also get a free


===== BOOK PAGE 270 =====

270    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
8. Check the table for any impossible situations, contradictions, and redundancies. They are 
discussed in more detail later.
9. Rearrange the conditions and actions (or even rules) if it makes the decision table more 
understandable.
A Decision Table Example. Figure 9.9 shows a decision table developed using the steps previously 
outlined. In this example, a company is trying to maintain a meaningful mailing list of custom-
ers. The objective is to send out only the catalogs from which customers will buy merchandise.
The managers realize that certain loyal customers order from every catalog and that some peo-
ple on the mailing list never order. These ordering patterns are easy to observe but deciding which 
catalogs to send customers who order only from selected catalogs is more difficult. Once these 
decisions are made, a decision table is constructed for three conditions (C1: customer ordered 
from Fall catalog; C2: customer ordered from holiday catalog; and C3: customer ordered from 
specialty catalog), each having two alternatives (Y or N). Three actions can be taken (A1: send 
out this year’s holiday catalog; A2: send out the new specialty catalog; and A3: send out both 
catalogs). The resulting decision table has six rows (three conditions and three actions) and eight 
columns () ××twoa lternatives twoa lternatives twoa lternatives .
The decision table is now examined to see if it can be reduced. There are no mutually exclusive 
conditions, so it is not possible to get by with fewer than three condition rows. No rules allow the 
combination of actions. It is possible, however, to combine some of the rules, as shown in Figure 9.10. 
For instance, Rules 2, 4, 6, and 8 can be combined because they all have two things in common:
FIGURE 9.10
Combining rules to simplify the 
customer-catalog decision table.
Conditions and Actions
Conditions and Actions
Rules
Rules
Customer ordered from fall catalog.
Customer ordered from holiday catalog.
Customer ordered from specialty catalog.
Send out this year’s holiday catalog.
Send out specialty catalog.
Send out both catalogs.
Customer ordered from fall catalog.
Customer ordered from holiday catalog.
Customer ordered from specialty catalog.
Send out this year’s holiday catalog.
Send out specialty catalog.
Send out both catalogs.
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y Y
N
N N
N
N N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
1' 2' 3'
FIGURE 9.9
Constructing a decision table for 
deciding which catalog to send to 
customers who order only from 
selected catalogs.
Conditions and Actions
Customer ordered from fall catalog.
Customer ordered from holiday catalog.
Customer ordered from specialty catalog.
Send out this year’s holiday catalog.
Send out specialty catalog.
Send out both catalogs.
Rules
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Y Y Y Y N N N N
Y Y N N Y Y N N
Y N
X
X
X X
X
X X X
Y N Y N Y N


===== BOOK PAGE 271 =====

CHAPTER 9  •  PROCESS  SPECIfICATIONS  AND  S TR uCTuRED  DECISIONS      271
FIGURE 9.11
Adding a rule to the customer-
catalog decision table changes 
the entire table.
Conditions and Actions
Rules
Customer ordered from fall catalog.
Customer ordered from holiday catalog.
Customer ordered from specialty catalog.
Send out this year’s holiday catalog.
Send out specialty catalog.
Send out both catalogs.
Do not send out any catalog.
Y
Y
Y Y
Y
Y
N
N
N
X
X
X
X
1' 2' 3' 4'
Customer ordered $50 or more.
FIGURE 9.12
Checking the decision table for 
impossible situations is important.
Conditions and Actions
Salary > $50,000/year
Salary < $2,000/month
Action 1
Action 2
Rules
1 2 3 4
Y Y N N
Y N Y N
This is an
impossible
situation.
1. They instruct us to send out this year’s holiday catalog.
2. The alternative for Condition 3 is always N.
It doesn’t matter what the alternatives are for the first two conditions, so it is possible to insert 
dashes [—] in place of the Y or N.
The remaining rules—Rules 1, 3, 5, and 7—cannot be reduced to a single rule because two 
different actions remain. Instead, Rules 1 and 5 can be combined; likewise, Rules 3 and 7 can be 
combined.
Checking for Completeness and Accuracy
Checking over your decision tables for completeness and accuracy is essential. Four main prob-
lems can occur in developing decision tables: incompleteness, impossible situations, contradic-
tions, and redundancy.
Ensuring that all conditions, condition alternatives, actions, and action rules are com-
plete is of utmost importance. Suppose an important condition—if a customer ordered less than 
$100—had been left out of the catalog store problem discussed earlier. The whole decision table 
would change because a new condition, new set of alternatives, new action, and one or more new 
action rules would have to be added. Suppose the rule is: IF the customer did not order more than 
$100, THEN do not send any catalogs. A new Rule 4 would be added to the decision table, as 
shown in Figure 9.11.
When building decision tables as outlined in the foregoing steps, it is sometimes possible to 
set up impossible situations. An example is shown in Figure 9.12. Rule 1 is not feasible because a 
person cannot earn greater than $50,000 per year and less than $2,000 per month at the same time.  
The other three rules are valid. The problem went unnoticed because the first condition was mea-
sured in years and the second condition in months.


===== BOOK PAGE 272 =====

272    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
Contradictions occur when rules suggest different actions but satisfy the same conditions. 
The fault could lie with the way the analyst constructed the table or with the information the 
analyst received. Contradictions often occur if dashes [—] are incorrectly inserted into the table. 
Redundancy occurs when identical sets of alternatives require the exact same action. Figure 9.13 
illustrates a contradiction and a redundancy. The analyst must determine what is correct and then 
resolve the contradiction or redundancy.
Decision tables are an important tool in the analysis of structured decisions. One major advan-
tage of using decision tables over other methods is that tables help the analyst ensure complete-
ness. When using decision tables, it is also easy to check for possible errors, such as impossible 
situations, contradictions, and redundancy. Decision table processors, which take the table as input 
and provide computer program code as output, are also available.
DECISION TREES
Decision trees are used when complex branching occurs in a structured decision process. Trees 
are also useful when it is essential to keep a string of decisions in a particular sequence. Although 
the decision tree derives its name from natural trees, decision trees are most often drawn on 
their side, with the root of the tree on the left side of the paper; from there, the tree branches out 
to the right. This orientation allows the analyst to write on the branches to describe conditions 
and actions.
month, the mileage is doubled no matter what day, and if it is the 
17th leg traveled, the mileage is tripled. If the traveler booked 
the flight through an online booking service such as Priceline, 
Momondo, Agoda, or KAYAK, 100 miles are added.”
“I hope that clears it up for you, Ariadne. Enjoy your flight, and 
thanks for flying Premium.”
Ariadne Icarus, whose desire to board the Premium plane has 
all but melted away during Glen’s long explanation, fades into the 
sea of people wading through the security lanes without so much 
as a peep in reply.
Develop a decision tree for Premium Airlines’ new policy for 
accumulating award miles so that the policy becomes clearer, is 
easier to grasp visually, and hence is easier to explain.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 9.4 
A Tree for Free
“I know you’ve got a plane to catch but let me try to explain it to 
you once again, sir,” pleads Glen Curtiss, a marketing manager for 
Premium Airlines. Glen has been attempting (unsuccessfully) to 
explain the airline’s new policy for accumulating miles for awards 
(such as upgrades to first class and free flights) to a member of 
Premium’s “Flying for Prizes” club.
Glen takes another pass at getting the policy off the ground, 
saying, “You see, the traveler (that’s you, Ariadne Icarus) will be 
awarded the miles actually flown. If the actual mileage for the leg 
was less than 500 miles, the traveler will get 500 miles of credit. If 
the trip was made on a Saturday, the actual mileage will be multi-
plied by two. If the trip was made on a Tuesday, the multiplication 
factor is 1.5. If this is the ninth leg traveled during the calendar 
FIGURE 9.13
Checking the decision table for 
inadvertent contradictions and 
redundancy is important.
Conditions and Actions
Rules
Y
Y Y
Y Y
Y
Y
Y
YN
N
N
N
N
N
X
X
X
X X
X
X
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Y
N
Condition 1
Condition 2
Condition 3       
Action 1
Action 2
Action 3
Contradiction Redundancy


===== BOOK PAGE 273 =====

CHAPTER 9  •  PROCESS  SPECIfICATIONS  AND  S TR uCTuRED  DECISIONS      273
Unlike the decision tree used in management science, the analyst’s tree does not contain prob-
abilities and outcomes. In systems analysis, trees are used mainly for identifying and organizing 
conditions and actions in a completely structured decision process.
Drawing Decision Trees
It is useful to distinguish between conditions and actions when drawing decision trees. This 
distinction is especially relevant when conditions and actions take place over a period of time 
and their sequence is important. For this purpose, use a square node to indicate an action and a 
circle to represent a condition. Using notation makes the decision tree more readable, as does 
numbering the circles and squares sequentially. Think of a circle as signifying IF, whereas the 
square means THEN.
When decision tables were discussed in an earlier section, a point-of-sale example was used 
to determine the purchase approval actions for a department store. Conditions included the amount 
of the sale (under $50) and whether the customer paid by check or credit card. The four actions 
possible were complete the sale after verifying the signature; complete the sale with no signature 
needed; call the supervisor for approval; or communicate electronically with the bank for credit 
card authorization. Figure 9.14 illustrates how this example can be drawn as a decision tree. 
In drawing the tree:
1. Identify all conditions and actions and their order and timing (if they are critical).
2. Begin building the tree from left to right, making sure you list all possible alternatives 
before moving to the right.
This simple tree is symmetrical, and the four actions at the end are unique. A tree does not 
need to be symmetrical. Most decision trees have conditions that have a different number of 
branches. Also, identical actions may appear more than once.
A decision tree has three main advantages over a decision table. First, it takes advantage of 
the sequential structure of decision tree branches so that the order of checking conditions and 
executing actions is immediately noticeable. Second, conditions and actions of decision trees are 
found on some branches but not on others; in contrast, with decision tables, conditions and actions 
are all part of the same table. Conditions and actions that are critical are connected directly to 
other conditions and actions, whereas conditions that do not matter are absent. In other words, 
the tree does not have to be symmetrical. Third, compared with decision tables, decision trees are 
more readily understood by others in an organization. Consequently, they are more appropriate 
as a communication tool.
CHOOSING A STRUCTURED DECISION  
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUE
We have examined the three techniques for analysis of structured decisions: structured 
English, decision tables, and decision trees. Although they need not be used exclusively, it is 
customary to choose one analysis technique for a decision rather than employing all three. 
FIGURE 9.14
Drawing a decision tree to show 
the noncash purchase approval 
actions for a department store.
Complete the sale after verifying signature.
Complete the sale. No signature needed.
Call supervisor for approval.
Communicate electronically with bank for
credit card authorization.
Check
Credit Card
Check
Under $50
$ $50
Credit Card
2
5
7
6
4
3
1


===== BOOK PAGE 274 =====

274    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
The following guidelines provide you with a way to choose one of the three techniques for 
a particular case:
1. Use structured English when
a. There are many repetitious actions
OR
b. Communication to end users is important.
2. Use decision tables when
a. Complex combinations of conditions, actions, and rules are found
OR
b. You require a method that effectively avoids impossible situations, redundancies, and 
contradictions.
3. Use decision trees when
a. The sequence of conditions and actions is critical
OR
b. When not every condition is relevant to every action (the branches are different).
Summary
Once an analyst has worked with users to identify data flows and begun constructing a data dictionary, it 
is time to turn to process specification and decision analysis. The three methods for decision analysis and 
describing process logic discussed in this chapter are structured English, decision tables, and decision trees. 
All three methods help an analyst develop the logic for structured decisions made in the organization. Making 
structured decisions need not involve human judgment.
Process specifications (or mini specs) are created for primitive processes on a data flow diagram as 
well as for some higher-level processes that explode to a child diagram. These specifications explain the 
decision-making logic and formulas that will transform process input data into output. The three goals of 
process specification are to reduce the ambiguity of the process, to obtain a precise description of what is 
accomplished, and to validate the system design.
One way to describe structured decisions is to use the method referred to as structured English, in 
which logic is expressed in sequential structures, decision structures, case structures, or iterations. Structured 
English uses accepted keywords such as IF, THEN, ELSE, DO, DO WHILE, and DO UNTIL to describe the 
logic used, and it indents to indicate the hierarchical structure of the decision process.
Decision tables provide another way to examine, describe, and document decisions. Four quadrants 
(viewed clockwise from the upper-left corner) are used to (1) describe the conditions, (2) identify possible 
condition (or decision) alternatives (such as Y or N), (3) indicate which actions should be performed, and 
(4) describe the actions. Decision tables are advantageous because the rules for developing the table itself, 
as well as the rules for eliminating redundancy, contradictions, and impossible situations, are straightforward 
and manageable. The use of decision tables promotes completeness and accuracy in analyzing structured 
decisions.
The third method for decision analysis is to use a decision tree, consisting of nodes (a square for actions 
and a circle for conditions) and branches. Decision trees are appropriate when actions must be accomplished 
in a certain sequence. There is no requirement that the tree be symmetrical, so only those conditions and 
actions that are critical to the decisions at hand are found on a particular branch.
Each of the decision analysis methods has advantages and should be used accordingly. Structured 
English is useful when many actions are repeated and when communicating with others is important. Deci-
sion tables provide a complete analysis of complex situations while limiting the need for change attribut-
able to impossible situations, redundancies, or contradictions. Decision trees are important when proper 
sequencing of conditions and actions is critical and when each condition is not relevant to each action.
Keywords and Phrases
action
action rule
condition
condition alternative
decision table
decision tree
mini specs
process specifications
structured decision
structured English


===== BOOK PAGE 275 =====

CHAPTER 9  •  PROCESS  SPECIfICATIONS  AND  S TR uCTuRED  DECISIONS      275
Review Questions
1. List three reasons for producing process specifications.
2. Define what is meant by a structured decision.
3. What four elements must be known for a systems analyst to design systems for structured decisions?
4. What are the two building blocks of structured English?
5. List five conventions that should be followed when using structured English.
6. What is the advantage of using structured English to communicate with people in an organization?
7. Which quadrant of the decision table is used for conditions? Which is used for condition alternatives?
8. What is the first step to take in developing a decision table?
9. List the four main problems that can occur in developing decision tables.
10. What is one of the major advantages of decision tables over other methods of decision analysis?
11. What are the main uses of decision trees in systems analysis?
12. List the four major steps in building decision trees.
13. What three advantages do decision trees have over decision tables?
14. In which two situations should you use structured English?
15. In which two situations do decision tables work best?
16. In which two situations are decision trees preferable?
Problems
1. Greg Bott is reviewing his firm’s expense reimbursement policies with the new salesperson, Phil 
Menard. “Our reimbursement policies depend on the situation. You see, first we determine if it is 
a local trip. If it is, we only pay mileage of 45 cents a mile. If the trip was a one-day trip, we pay 
mileage and then check the times of departure and return. To be reimbursed for breakfast, you must 
leave by 7:00 a.m., lunch by 11:00 a.m., and have dinner by 5:00 p.m. To receive reimbursement for 
breakfast, you must return later than 10:00 a.m., have lunch later than 2:00 p.m., and have dinner by 
7:00 p.m. On a trip lasting more than one day, we allow hotel, taxi, and airfare, as well as meal allow-
ances. The same times apply for meal expenses.” Write structured English for Greg’s narrative of the 
reimbursement policies.
2. Draw a decision tree depicting the reimbursement policy in Problem 1.
3. Draw a decision table for the reimbursement policy in Problem 1.
4. A computer supplies firm called True Disk has set up accounts for countless businesses in Dosville. 
True Disk sends out invoices monthly and will give discounts if payments are made within 
10 days. The discounting policy is as follows: If the amount of the order for computer supplies is 
greater than $1,000, subtract 4 percent for the order; if the amount is between $500 and $1,000, 
subtract a 2 percent discount; if the amount is less than $500, do not apply any discount. All orders 
made online automatically receive an extra 5 percent discount. Any special order (computer furniture, 
for example) is exempt from all discounting.
Develop a decision table for True Disk discounting decisions, for which the condition alterna-
tives are limited to Y and N.
5. Develop an extended-entry decision table for the True Disk company discount policy described in 
Problem 4.
6. Develop a decision tree for the True Disk company discount policy in Problem 4.
7. Write structured English to solve the True Disk company situation in Problem 4.
8. Premium Airlines has recently offered to settle claims for a class-action suit, which was originated 
for alleged price fixing of tickets. The proposed settlement is stated as follows:
Initially, Premium Airlines will make available to the settlement class a main fund of $25 million 
in coupons. If the number of valid claims submitted is 1.25 million or fewer, the value of each claim 
will be the result obtained by dividing $25 million by the total number of valid claims submitted. For 
example, if there are 500,000 valid claims, each person submitting a valid claim will receive a coupon 
with a value of $50.
The denomination of each coupon distributed will be in a whole dollar amount not to exceed 
$50. Thus, if there are fewer than 500,000 valid claims, the value of each claim will be divided among 
two coupons or more. For example, if there are 250,000 valid claims, each person submitting a valid 
claim will receive two coupons, each having a face value of $50, for a total coupon value of $100.
If the number of valid claims submitted is between 1.25 million and 1.5 million, Premium 
Airlines will make available a supplemental fund of coupons, with a potential value of $5 million. 
The supplemental fund will be made available to the extent necessary to provide one $20 coupon for 
each valid claim.


===== BOOK PAGE 276 =====

276    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
If there are more than 1.5 million valid claims, the total amount of the main fund and the supple-
mental fund, $30 million, will be divided evenly to produce one coupon for each valid claim. The 
value of each such coupon will be $30 million divided by the total number of valid claims.
Draw a decision tree for the Premium Airlines settlement.
9. Write structured English for the Premium Airlines settlement in Problem 8.
10. “Well, it’s sort of hard to describe,” says Sharon, a counselor at Less Is More Nutrition and  
Wellness Center. “I’ve never had to really tell anybody about the way we charge clients or anything, 
but here goes.”
“When clients come into Less Is More, we check to see if they’ve ever used our service before. 
Repeat clients get a reduced rate of $100 for the first visit if they return within a year of the end of 
their program.”
“Everyone new pays an initial fee, which is $200 for a strength and endurance evaluation. The 
client may bring in a coupon at this time, and then we deduct $50 from the up-front fee. Half of 
our clients use our coupons and find out about us from them. We just give our repeaters their $100 
off, though; they can’t use a coupon too! Clients who transfer in from one of our centers in another 
city get $75 off their first payment fee, but the coupon doesn’t apply. Customers who pay cash get 
10 percent off the $200, but they can’t use a coupon with that.”
Create a decision table with Y and N conditions for the client charge system at Less Is More 
Nutrition and Wellness Center.
11. Reduce the decision table in Figure 9.EX1 to the minimum number of rules.
12. Azure Isle Resort has a pricing structure for vacationers in one of its three dwelling categories: the 
hotel, villas, and beach bungalows. The base price is for staying in the hotel. Beach bungalows have 
a 10 percent surcharge and villas have a 15 percent surcharge. The final price includes a discount of 
4 percent for returning customers. Further conditions apply to how close to capacity the resort is and 
whether the requested date is within one month from the current date. If the resort is 50 percent full 
and the time is within one month, there is a 12 percent discount. If the resort is 70 percent full and the 
time is within one month, there is a 6 percent discount. If the resort is 85 percent full and it is within 
one month, there is a 4 percent discount.
Develop an optimized decision table for the Azure Isle Resort pricing structure.
13. Create a decision tree for Problem 12.
14. The base ticket price for Cloudliner Airlines is determined by the distance traveled and the day of 
the week a passenger is traveling. In addition, the airline adjusts its ticket prices based on a number 
of categories. If the seats remaining are greater than 50 percent of capacity and the number of days 
before the flight is less than 7, the price is deeply discounted with a special web offer for the flight. If 
the seats remaining are greater than 50 percent and the flight date is from 7 to 21 days in the future, 
there is a medium price discount. If the seats remaining are greater than 50 percent and the number of 
days before travel are greater than 21, there is only a small discount.
If the seats remaining are from 20 percent to 50 percent and the days before the flight are fewer 
than 7, the ticket has a medium discount. If the seats remaining are from 20 percent to 50 percent 
and the flight date is from 7 to 21 days in the future, there is a low discount for prices. If the seats 
remaining are from 20 percent to 50 percent and the number of days before travel are greater than 21, 
there is no discount.
FIGURE 9. EX1
A decision table for a warehouse.
Rules
Sufﬁcient quantity
    on hand
Quantity large enough
    for discount
Wholesale customer
Sales tax exemption
ﬁled
Ship items and
    prepare invoice
Set up backorder
Deduct discount
Add sales tax
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
X
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N N N N N N N
Y Y Y Y N N N N Y Y Y Y NN N N
Y Y N N Y Y N N Y Y N N Y Y N N
Y N Y N Y N Y N Y N Y N Y N Y N
X
X X
X X X X X X
X X X X X X
X X X X X X X X
Conditions and Actions


===== BOOK PAGE 277 =====

CHAPTER 9  •  PROCESS  SPECIfICATIONS  AND  S TR uCTuRED  DECISIONS      277
If the seats remaining are less than 20 percent and the flight date is from 7 to 21 days in the 
future, there is a large increase in price. If the seats remaining are less than 20 percent and the num-
ber of days before travel are greater than 21, there is a small increase in price.
Develop an optimized decision table for the Cloudliner Airlines ticket price adjustment policies.
15. Develop a decision tree for the situation in Problem 14.
Group Projects
1. Each group member (or each subgroup) should choose to become an “expert” and prepare to explain 
how and when to use one of the following structured decision techniques: structured English, deci-
sion tables, or decision trees. Each group member or subgroup should then make a case for the 
usefulness of its assigned decision analysis technique for studying the types of structured decisions 
made by Maverick Transport on dispatching particular trucks to particular destinations. As back-
ground for the problem, your group should know that Maverick Transport (first seen in Chapter 5) 
is a 15-year-old national U.S. trucking firm. Maverick is a less-than-a-truckload carrier. The people 
in management work from the philosophy of just in time (JIT), in which they have created a partner-
ship that includes the shipper, the receiver, and the carrier (Maverick Transport) for the purpose of 
transporting and delivering the materials required JIT for their use on the production line. Maverick 
maintains 626 tractors for hauling freight and has 45,000 square feet of warehouse space and 
21,000 square feet of office space. Each group should make a presentation of its preferred technique 
for making structured decisions.
2. After hearing each presentation, the entire group should reach a consensus on which technique 
is most appropriate for analyzing the dispatching decisions of Maverick Transport and why that 
technique is best in this instance. Write the group’s recommendation for a decision technique in a 
paragraph.
Selected Bibliography
Alsolami, F., Azad, M., Chikalov, I., & Moshkov, M. (2020). Decision and inhibitory trees and decision 
tables with many-valued decisions. Springer Nature.
Anderson, D. R., Sweeney, D. J., Williams, T. A., Camm, J. D., & Cochran, J. J. (2013). An introduction to 
management science (13th ed.). Cengage Learning.
Chountalas, P. T., & Lagodimos, A. G. (2019). Paradigms in business process management specifica-
tions: a critical overview. Business Process Management Journal, 25(5), 1040–1069. https://doi.
org/10.1108/BPMJ-01-2018-0023
Custode, L. L., & Iacca, I. (2020). Evolutionary learning of interpretable decision trees. https://arxiv.org/
pdf/2012.07723.pdf
Good, P. (2022). What is structured English? www.wisegeek.com/what-is-structured-english.htm
Kress-Gazit, H., Fainekos, G. E., & Pappas, G. J. (2008). Translating structured English to robot 
controllers. Advance Robotics, 22, 1343–1359.
Wood, H. (2012, May 30). An intro to logic trees and structured programming. http://www.techopedia.
com/2/28552/it-business/enterprise-applications/an-intro-to-logic-trees-and-structured-programming


===== BOOK PAGE 278 =====

278
Object-Oriented  
Systems Analysis  
and Design Using UML*
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Once you have mastered the material in this chapter, you will be able to:
1 Understand what object-oriented systems analysis and design is and appreciate its 
usefulness.
2 Learn the basics of CRC cards and object think.
3 Comprehend the concepts of unified modeling language (UML), the standard approach for 
modeling a system in the object-oriented world.
4 Explore use case modeling.
5 Learn how to draw and interpret activity diagrams.
6 Draw and explain sequence and communication diagrams.
7 Be able to develop class diagrams.
8 Enhance sequence diagrams based on the class diagrams just developed.
9 Enhance call diagrams in a variety of ways.
10 Learn how to develop statechart diagrams.
11 Understand packages and other UML artifacts.
12 Recognize how to put UML to work.
13 Realize the importance of UML for modeling.
Object-oriented analysis and design facilitate logical, rapid, and thorough methods for cre-
ating new systems that are responsive to a changing business landscape. Object-oriented 
techniques work well in situations in which complicated information systems are undergoing 
continuous maintenance, adaptation, and redesign.
In this chapter, we introduce unified modeling language (UML), the industry standard 
for modeling object-oriented systems. The UML toolset includes diagrams that allow you 
to visualize the construction of an object-oriented system. Each design iteration takes a 
10 
CHAPTER  
*Chapter written by Julie E. Kendall, Kenneth E. Kendall, and Allen Schmidt.

