
===== BOOK PAGE 279 =====

CHAPTER 10  •  OBJECT -ORIENTED SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN USING UML     279
OBJECT-ORIENTED CONCEPTS
Object-oriented programming differs from traditional procedural programming by examining 
the objects that are part of a system. Each object is a computer representation of some actual 
thing or event. General descriptions of the key object-oriented concepts of objects, classes, and 
inheritance are presented in this section, and further details on other UML concepts are introduced 
later in this chapter.
Objects
Objects are persons, places, or things that are relevant to the system being analyzed. Object-
oriented systems describe entities as objects. Typical objects may be customers, items, orders, 
and so on. Objects also may be graphical user interface (GUI) displays or text areas on the display.
Classes
Objects are typically part of a group of similar items called classes. The desire to place items into 
classes is not new. Describing the world as being made up of animals, vegetables, and minerals is an 
example of classification. The scientific approach includes classes of animals (such as mammals), 
and then divides the classes into subclasses (such as egg-laying animals and pouched mammals).
successively more detailed look at the design of the system, until the things and relation-
ships in the system are clearly and precisely defined in UML documents. UML is a powerful 
tool that can greatly improve the quality of your systems analysis and design and thereby 
help create higher-quality information systems.
When the object-oriented approach was first introduced, advocates cited reusability 
of the objects as the main benefit of the approach. It makes intuitive sense that recycling 
program parts should reduce the costs of development in computer-based systems. It has 
proven to be very effective in the development of graphical user interfaces and databases. 
Although reusability is the main goal, maintaining systems is also very important. The 
object-oriented approach creates objects that contain both data and program code, and a 
change in one object has a minimal impact on other objects.
video, object-oriented programming is a way to break apart huge 
programs with millions of lines of code into smaller functions that 
can then be worked on by functional teams. Object-oriented pro-
gramming is a way for the analyst or programmer to hide complex-
ity by encapsulating low-level details into high-level components 
and then selectively revealing it to different functional teams. After 
you view the video, please reflect on the following questions:
1. How does object-oriented programming allow you to move 
to greater levels of abstraction in your thinking?
2. Consider the importance of good documentation when using 
object-oriented programming. What are two ways analysts 
can document their object-oriented programs?
3. Think about the analogy between preventive medicine and 
preventive software. How appropriate is this analogy?
4. How can an integrated development environment (IDE) used 
for object-oriented programming improve the quality of 
output of analysts and programmers?
SYSTEMS SCENARIO  
Modeling with Object-Oriented Approaches
This chapter explores object-oriented systems analysis and design 
to help you comprehend the concepts of unified modeling lanugage, 
use case modeling, and many other diagram types for object-
oriented modeling. In this video, the topic of software engineering 
using object-oriented programming is introduced. As implied in the 
To view the video for this scenario, 
see eText Chapter 10.
Crash Course Computer  Science/
Boclips


===== BOOK PAGE 280 =====

280    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
FIGURE 10.1
An example of a UML class.  
A class is depicted as a rectangle 
consisting of the class name, 
attributes, and methods.
RentalCar
size
color
make
model
rentOut( )
checkIn( )
service( )
Class Name
Attributes
Methods (Operations)
The idea behind classes is to have a reference point and describe a specific object in terms 
of its similarities to or differences from members of its own class. In doing so, it is more efficient 
for someone to say, “The koala is a marsupial (or pouched animal) with a large round head and 
furry ears” than it is to describe a koala by describing all its characteristics as a mammal. It is 
more efficient to describe characteristics, appearance, and even behavior in this way. When you 
hear the word reusable in the object-oriented world, it means you can be more efficient because 
you do not have to start at the beginning to describe an object every time it is needed for software 
development.
Objects are represented by and grouped into classes that are optimal for reuse and maintain-
ability. A class defines the set of shared attributes and behaviors found in each object in the class. 
For example, records for students in a course section store similar information for each student. 
The students could be said to make up a class (no pun intended). The values may be different for 
each student, but the type of information is the same. Programmers must define the various classes 
in the program they are writing. When the program runs, objects can be created from the estab-
lished class. The term instantiate is used when an object is created from a class. For example, a pro-
gram could instantiate a student named Mala Kaul as an object from the class labeled as Student.
What makes object-oriented programming, and thus object-oriented analysis and design, 
different from classical programming is the technique of putting all of an object’s attributes and 
methods within one self-contained structure, the class itself. This is a familiar occurrence in 
the physical world. For example, a packaged cake mix is analogous to a class because it has the 
ingredients as well as instructions on how to mix and bake the cake. A wool sweater is similar 
to a class because it has a label with care instructions sewn into it that caution you to wash it by 
hand and lay it flat to dry.
Each class should have a name that differentiates it from all other classes. Class names are 
usually nouns or short phrases and begin with an uppercase letter. In Figure 10.1, the class is called 
RentalCar. In UML, a class is drawn as a rectangle. The rectangle contains two other important 
features: a list of attributes and a series of methods. These items describe a class, the unit of 
analysis that is a large part of what we call object-oriented analysis and design.
An attribute describes some property that is possessed by all objects of the class. Notice that 
the RentalCar class possesses the attributes size, color, make, and model. All cars possess these 
attributes, but each car will have different values for its attributes. For example, a car can be blue, 
white, or some other color. Later on, we demonstrate how you can be more specific about the range 
of values for these properties. When specifying attributes, the first letter is usually lowercase.
A method is an action that can be requested from any object of the class. Methods are 
the processes that a class knows to carry out. Methods are also called operations. For the class 
RentalCar, rentOut(), checkIn(), and service() are examples of methods. When specifying 
methods, the first letter is usually lowercase.
Inheritance
A key concept of object-oriented systems is inheritance. Classes can have children; that is, one 
class can be created out of another class. In UML, the original—or parent—class is known as a 
base class. The child class is called a derived class. A derived class can be created in such a way 
that it will inherit all the attributes and behaviors of the base class. A derived class, however, may 
have additional attributes and behaviors. For example, there might be a Vehicle class for a car 
rental company that contains attributes such as size, color, and make.


===== BOOK PAGE 281 =====

CHAPTER 10  •  OBJECT -ORIENTED SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN USING UML     281
Inheritance reduces programming labor by making it easy to use common objects. The pro-
grammer only needs to declare that the Car class inherits from the Vehicle class and then provide 
any additional details about new attributes or behaviors that are unique to a car. All the attributes 
and behaviors of the Vehicle class are automatically and implicitly part of the Car class and 
require no additional programming. An analyst can therefore define once but use many times, 
and this is similar to data that is in the third normal form, defined only once in one database 
table (as discussed in Chapter 13).
The derived classes shown in Figure 10.2 are Car or Truck. Here the attributes are preceded 
by minus signs and methods are preceded by plus signs. We discuss this in more detail later in the 
chapter, but for now note that the minus signs mean that these attributes are private (not shared 
with other classes) and these methods are public (may be invoked by other classes).
Program code reuse has been a part of structured systems development and programming 
languages (such as COBOL) for many years, and there have been subprograms that encapsulate 
data. Inheritance, however, is a feature that is found only in object-oriented systems.
CRC CARDS AND OBJECT THINK
Now that we have covered the fundamental concepts of object-oriented systems analysis 
and design, we need to examine ways to create classes and objects from the business problems and 
systems we are facing. One way to begin enacting the object-oriented approach is to start thinking 
and talking in this new way. One handy approach is to develop CRC cards.
CRC stands for class, responsibilities, and collaborators. An analyst can use these concepts 
when beginning to talk about or model a system from an object-oriented perspective. CRC cards 
are used to represent the responsibilities of classes and the interaction between the classes. Ana-
lysts create the cards based on scenarios that outline system requirements. These scenarios model 
the behavior of the system under study. If they are to be used in a group, CRC cards can be created 
manually on small note cards for flexibility, or they can be created using a computer.
FIGURE 10.2
A class diagram showing 
inheritance. Car and Truck are 
specific examples of vehicles and 
inherit the characteristics of the 
more general class Vehicle.
Vehicle
–size
–color
–make
–model
–available
–ratePerDay
–ratePerWeek
–ratePerMile
+rentOut( )
+checkIn( )
+service( )
+addNew( )
Car
is a is a
–size
–color
–make
–model
–available
–ratePerDay
–ratePerWeek
–ratePerMile
–style
+rentOut( )
+checkIn( )
+service( )
+addNew( )
Truck
–size
–color
–make
–model
–available
–ratePerDay
–ratePerWeek
–ratePerMile
–length
–4WheelDrive
–manualShift
+rentOut( )
+checkIn( )
+service( )
+addNew( )


===== BOOK PAGE 282 =====

282    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
We have added two columns to the original CRC card template: the Object Think column and 
the property column. The Object Think statements are written in plain English, and the property, 
or attribute, name is entered in its proper place. The purpose of these columns is to clarify thinking 
and help move toward creating UML diagrams.
Interacting During a CRC Session
CRC cards can be created interactively with a handful of analysts who can work together to 
identify the class in the problem domain presented by the business. One suggestion is to find 
all the nouns and verbs in a problem statement that has been created to capture the problem. 
Nouns usually indicate the classes in the system, and responsibilities can be found by identifying 
the verbs.
With your analyst group, brainstorm to identify all the classes you can. Follow the standard 
format for brainstorming, which is not to criticize any participant’s response at this point but rather 
to elicit as many responses as possible. When all classes have been identified, the analysts can 
compile them, weed out the illogical ones, and write each one on its own card. Assign one class 
to each person in the group, who will “own” it for the duration of the CRC session.
Next, the group creates scenarios; these are walkthroughs of system functions that use the 
desired functionality from the requirements document previously created. Typical systems meth-
ods should be considered first, with exceptions such as error recovery taken up after the routine 
ones have been covered.
As the group decides which class is responsible for a particular function, the analyst who owns 
the class for the session picks up that card and declares, “I need to fulfill my responsibility.” When 
a card is held in the air, it is considered an object and can do things. The group then proceeds to 
refine the responsibility into smaller and smaller tasks, if possible. The object can fulfill these tasks 
if it is appropriate, or the group can decide that it can be fulfilled by interacting with other things. 
If there are no other appropriate classes in existence, the group may need to create one.
The four CRC cards depicted in Figure 10.3 show four classes for course offerings. Notice 
that in a class called Course, the systems analyst is referred to four collaborators: the department, 
7. An accounts receivable report is sent to the accounting 
department.
Notice the series of data flow diagrams in Chapter 7 to help you 
conceptualize the problem and begin making the transition to 
Object Think.
Because you are such good friends with Jules and Vern and 
because you wouldn’t mind getting a little practical experience using 
O-O thinking, you agree to apply what you know and give them 
a report. Once you have reread the business activities for World’s 
Trend, provide a timely review by completing the following tasks:
• Use the CRC cards technique to list classes, responsibilities, 
and collaborators.
• Use the Object Think technique to list “knows” and 
corresponding attributes for the objects in those classes 
identified in the previous stage.
Write up both steps and fly over to World’s Trend headquarters 
with your report in hand. Clearly, Jules and Vern are hoping for a 
fantastic voyage into the new world of O-O methods.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 10.1 
Around the World in 80 Objects
Because you have described the advantages of using object-
oriented (O-O) approaches, Jules and Vern, two top executives 
at World’s Trend (a mail-order supplier of high-quality, fashion-
able clothing whose customers place orders by phone, mail, or via 
their website), would like you to analyze their business using this 
approach. Here is a summary of World’s Trend’s business activities:
1. When customer orders come in, the item master and the 
customer master files are both updated. If an item is out of 
stock, the inventory control department is notified.
2. If the order is from a new customer, a new record is created 
in the customer master file.
3. Picking slips are produced for the customer order and sent to 
the warehouse.
4. A shipping statement is prepared.
5. The process of shipping a customer order involves getting 
the goods from the warehouse and matching up the customer 
shipping statement, getting the correct customer address, and 
shipping it all to the customer.
6. The customer statement is generated, and a billing statement 
is sent to a customer once a month.


===== BOOK PAGE 283 =====

CHAPTER 10  •  OBJECT -ORIENTED SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN USING UML     283
FIGURE 10.3
Four CRC cards for course offerings show how analysts fill in the details for classes, responsibilities, and collaborators, as well 
as for Object Think statements and property names.
Class Name:
Superclasses:
Subclasses:
Responsibilities Collaborators Object Think Property
Department
Add a new department Course I know my name
I know my department chair Provide department information
Department Name
Chair Name
Class Name:
Superclasses:
Subclasses:
Responsibilities Collaborators Object Think Property
Course
Add a new course Department I know my course number
I know my description
I know my number of creditsAssignment
Exam
T extbookChange course information
Display course information
Course Number
Course Description
Credits
Class Name:
Superclasses:
Subclasses:
Responsibilities Collaborators Object Think Property
T extbook
Add a new textbook Course I know my ISBN
I know my author
I know my title
I know my edition
I know my publisher
I know if I am required
Edition
Publisher
Required
Change textbook information
Find textbook information
Remove obsolete textbooks
ISBN
Author
Title
Class Name:
Superclasses:
Subclasses:
Responsibilities Collaborators Object Think Property
Assignment
Add a new assignment I know my assignment number
I know my description
I know how many points I am worth
Change an assignment
View an assignment
I know when I am due
T ask Number
T ask Description
Points
Due Date
Course


===== BOOK PAGE 284 =====

284    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
the textbook, the course assignment, and the course exam. These collaborators are then described 
as classes of their own on the other CRC cards.
The responsibilities listed will eventually evolve into what are called methods in UML. The 
Object Think statements seem elementary, but they are conversational so as to encourage a group 
of analysts during a CRC session to describe as many of these statements as possible. As shown 
in the example, all dialogue during a CRC session is carried out in the first person, so that even 
the textbook speaks: “I know my ISBN.” “I know my author.” These statements can then be used 
to describe attributes in UML. These attributes can be called by their variable names, such as 
edition and publisher.
UNIFIED MODELING LANGUAGE CONCEPTS AND DIAGRAMS
The UML approach is well worth investigating and understanding due to its wide acceptance and 
usage. UML provides a standardized set of tools to document the analysis and design of a software 
system. The UML toolset includes diagrams that enable people to visualize the construction of 
an object-oriented system, similar to the way a set of blueprints helps people visualize the con-
struction of a building. Whether you are working independently or with a large systems develop-
ment team, the documentation created with UML provides an effective means of communication 
between the development team and the business team on a project.
UML consists of things, relationships, and diagrams, as illustrated in Figure 10.4. The first 
components, or primary elements, of UML are called things. You may prefer another word, such 
as object, but in UML they are called things. Structural things are most common. Structural things 
FIGURE 10.4
An overall view of UML and its 
components: things, relationships, 
and diagrams.
UML Category
Things
UML Elements
Structural Things
Behavioral Things Interactions
State Machines
Grouping Things Packages
Annotational Things Notes
Classes
Interfaces
Collaborations
Use Cases
Active Classes
Components
Nodes
Relationships Structural Relationships Dependencies
Aggregations
Associations
Generalizations
Diagrams Structural Diagrams Class Diagrams
Component Diagrams
Deployment Diagrams
Behavioral Relationships Communicates
Includes
Extends
Generalizes
Behavioral Diagrams Use Case Diagrams
Sequence Diagrams
Communication Diagrams
Statechart Diagrams
Activity Diagrams
Speciﬁc UML Details


===== BOOK PAGE 285 =====

CHAPTER 10  •  OBJECT -ORIENTED SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN USING UML     285
are classes, interfaces, use cases, and many other elements that provide a way to create models. 
Structural things allow the user to describe relationships. Behavioral things describe how things 
work. Examples of behavioral things are interactions and state machines. Group things are used 
to define boundaries. An example of a group thing is a package. Finally, annotational things are 
used to add notes to diagrams.
Relationships are the glue that holds the things together. It is useful to think of relationships 
in two ways. Structural relationships are used to tie things together in structural diagrams. They 
include dependencies, aggregations, associations, and generalizations. Structural relationships 
show inheritance, for example. Behavioral relationships are used in the behavioral diagrams. The 
four basic types of behavioral relationships are communicates, includes, extends, and generalizes.
There are two main types of diagrams in UML: structural diagrams and behavioral dia-
grams. Structural diagrams are used, for example, to describe the relationships between classes. 
They include class diagrams, object diagrams, component diagrams, and deployment diagrams. 
Behavioral diagrams, on the other hand, can be used to describe the interaction between people 
(called actors in UML) and the thing we refer to as a use case, or how the actors use the system. 
Behavioral diagrams include use case diagrams, sequence diagrams, communication diagrams, 
statechart diagrams, and activity diagrams.
In the remainder of this chapter, we first discuss use case modeling, the basis for all UML 
techniques. Next, we look at how a use case is used to derive activities, sequences, and classes—
the most commonly used UML diagrams. Because entire books are dedicated to the syntax and 
usage of UML (the actual UML specification document is over 800 pages long), we provide only 
a brief summary of the most valuable and commonly used aspects of UML.
The six most commonly used UML diagrams are:
1. A use case diagram, describing how a system is used. Analysts start with a use case 
diagram.
2. A use case scenario (although technically it is not a diagram). This scenario is a verbal 
articulation of exceptions to the main behavior described by the primary use case.
3. An activity diagram, illustrating the overall flow of activities. Each use case may create 
one activity diagram.
4. Sequence diagrams, showing the sequence of activities and class relationships. Each use 
case may create one or more sequence diagrams. An alternative to a sequence diagram is a 
communication diagram, which contains the same information but emphasizes communi-
cation instead of timing.
5. Class diagrams, showing the classes and relationships. Sequence diagrams are used 
(along with CRC cards) to determine classes. An offshoot of a class diagram is a gen/spec 
diagram (which stands for generalization/specialization).
6. Statechart diagrams, showing the state transitions. Each class may create a statechart 
diagram, which is useful for determining class methods.
Figure 10.5 illustrates how these diagrams relate to one another. We discuss each of these 
diagrams in the following sections.
USE CASE MODELING
UML is fundamentally based on an object-oriented analysis technique known as use case model-
ing, which was introduced in Chapter 2. A use case model shows a view of the system from the 
user’s perspective, describing what a system does without describing how the system does it. 
UML can be used to analyze the use case model and to derive system objects and their interactions 
with each other and with the users of the system. UML techniques are used to further analyze the 
objects and their interactions to derive object behavior, attributes, and relationships.
A use case provides developers with a view of what the users want. It is free of technical or 
implementation details. We can think of a use case as a sequence of transactions in a system. The 
use case model is based on the interactions and relationships of individual use cases.
A use case always describes three things: an actor that initiates an event, the event that trig-
gers a use case, and the use case that performs the actions triggered by the event. In a use case, an 
actor using the system initiates an event that begins a related series of interactions in the system.


===== BOOK PAGE 286 =====

286    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
Use cases are used to document a single transaction or event. An event is an input to the system 
that happens at a specific time and place and causes the system to do something. For more infor-
mation about use case symbols and how to draw use case diagrams, see Chapter 2.
Figure 10.6 is a use case example of student enrollment at a university. Notice that only the 
most important functions are represented. The Add Student use case does not indicate how to 
add students, or the method of implementation. Students could be added in person, using the Web, 
using a touch-tone telephone, or any combination of these methods. The Add Student use case 
includes the Verify Identity use case to verify the identity of the student. The Purchase Textbook 
FIGURE 10.5
An overall view of UML diagrams, showing how each diagram leads to the development of other UML diagrams.
1 1..
11
Class Diagram
Statechart Diagram
Sequence Diagram
Use Case Diagram
Communication Diagram
Activity Diagram
Use Case Scenario
Identiﬁers
Steps
Conditions
Each use case
may create one
activity diagram.
Each use case
scenario may
create one
sequence diagram.
Use case
scenarios may be
generated from
the use case
diagram.
Use cases and
sequence
diagrams help
determine classes.
Sequence and
communication
diagrams are
interchangeable.
Each class may
have a statechart
diagram to help
determine
operations.


===== BOOK PAGE 287 =====

CHAPTER 10  •  OBJECT -ORIENTED SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN USING UML     287
use case extends the Enroll in Class use case and may be part of a system to enroll students in 
an online course.
It may seem as if the Change Student Information use case is a minor system feature and 
should not be included on the use case diagram, but because this information changes frequently, 
administration has a keen interest in allowing students to change their own personal information. 
The fact that the administrators deem this to be important not only justifies, but calls for, the use 
case to be written up.
Students would not be allowed to change grade point average, outstanding fees, and other 
information. This use case also includes the Verify Identity use case and, in this situation, it means 
having the student enter a user ID and password before gaining access to the system. View Student 
Information allows students to view their personal information as well as courses and grades.
A use case scenario example is shown in Figure 10.7. Some of the areas included are optional 
and may not be used by all organizations. The three main areas are:
1. A header area containing case identifiers and initiators
2. Steps performed
3. A footer area that contains preconditions, assumptions, questions, and other information
In the first area, the use case is identified by its name, Change Student Information; the 
actor is identified as a Student; and the use case and triggering event are described. The second 
area contains a series of steps that are performed as long as no errors are encountered. Finally, in 
FIGURE 10.6
A use case example of student 
enrollment.
<< include >>
<< include >>
<< include >>
<< include >>
<< extend >>
RegistrationStudent
Change Student
Information
Verify
Identity
Financial Oﬃce
Bookstore
DepartmentStudent
Transfer
Credits
View Student
Information
Purchase
Textbook
Enroll
in Class
Add
Student


===== BOOK PAGE 288 =====

288    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
the third area, all the pre- and postconditions and assumptions are identified. Some of these are 
obvious, such as the precondition that the student is on the correct web page and the assumption 
that the student has a valid student ID and password. Others are not so obvious, such as the out-
standing issue regarding how many times the student is allowed to logon to the system.
Use case diagrams provide the basis for creating other types of diagrams, such as class 
diagrams and activity diagrams. Use case scenarios are helpful in drawing sequence diagrams. 
Both use case diagrams and use case scenarios are powerful tools to help us understand how a 
system works in general.
ACTIVITY DIAGRAMS
An activity diagram shows the sequence of activities in a process, including sequential and parallel 
activities, and decisions that are made. An activity diagram is usually created for one use case and 
may show the different possible scenarios.
Use case name: Change Student Information UniqueID:    Student UC 005
Area:
Actor(s):
Description:
Triggering Event:
Preconditions:
Postconditions:
Assumptions:
Steps Performed (Main Path)
Student System
Student is on the Change Student Information web page.
Student has a browser and a valid user ID and password.
Student has successfully changed personal information.
Requirements Met: Allow students to be able to change personal information using a secure website.
Outstanding Issues: Should the number of times a student is allowed to logon be controlled?
Priority: Medium
Risk: Medium
Student uses Change Student Information website, enters student ID and password, and clicks
the Submit button.
1.   Student logs on to the secure web server.
2.   Student record is read and password is veriﬁed.
3.   Current student personal information is displayed
 on the Change Student web page.
4.   Student enters changes on the Change Student Web
 form and clicks Submit button.
5.   Changes are validated on the web server.
6.   Change Student Journal record is written.
7.   Student record is updated on the Student Master.
8.   Conﬁrmation web page is sent to the student.
Student ID, Password
Student Record, Student ID, Password
Student Record
Change Student Web Form
Change Student Web Form
Change Student Web Form
Change Student Web Form, Student Record
Conﬁrmation Page
Trigger type:
Student
Allow student to change their own information, such as name, home address, home telephone, campus
address, campus telephone, cell phone, and other information using a secure website.
Information for Steps
External Temporal
FIGURE 10.7
A use case scenario is divided into three sections: identification and initiation; steps performed; and conditions, assumptions, and questions.


===== BOOK PAGE 289 =====

CHAPTER 10  •  OBJECT -ORIENTED SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN USING UML     289
The symbols on an activity diagram are illustrated in Figure 10.8. A rectangle with rounded 
ends represents an activity, either a manual one, such as signing a legal document, or an automated 
one, such as a method or program.
An arrow represents an event. Events represent things that happen at a certain time and place.
A diamond represents either a decision (also called a branch) or a merge. Decisions have 
one arrow going into the diamond and several going out. A guard condition, showing the condition 
values, may be included. Merges show several events combining to form one event.
A long, flat rectangle represents a synchronization bar. These are used to show parallel 
activities and may have one event going into the synchronization bar and several events going out 
of it, called a fork. A synchronization in which several events merge into one event is called a join.
There are two symbols that show the start and end of the diagram. The initial state is shown 
as a filled-in circle. The final state is shown as a black circle surrounded by a white circle.
Rectangles surrounding other symbols, called swimlanes, indicate partitioning and are used 
to show which activities are done on which platform, such as a browser, server, or mainframe 
computer, or to show activities done by different user groups. Swimlanes are zones that can depict 
logic as well as the responsibility of a class.
You can see an example of swimlanes in Figure 10.9, which illustrates an activity diagram for 
the Change Student Information use case. It starts with the student logging onto the system by 
filling out a Web form and clicking the Submit button. The form is transmitted to the web server, 
which then passes the data to the mainframe computer. The mainframe accesses the STUDENT 
database and passes either a “Not Found” message or selected student data to the web server.
The diamond below the Get Student Record state indicates this decision. If the student 
record has not been found, the web server displays an error message on the web page. If 
the student record has been found, the web server formats a new web page containing the current 
student data in a Web form. The student may cancel the change from either the Logon System or 
the Enter Changes states, and the activity halts.
FIGURE 10.8
Specialized symbols are used to draw an activity diagram.
[condition] [else]
Merge
Branch
Join
Fork
Start
Activity
End
ActivityActivityActivity
We can add
swimlanes to
this diagram
to assign
responsibilities.
Branches allow
alternative
activities given
diﬀerent
conditions.
Forks allow
activities to go
in parallel.


===== BOOK PAGE 290 =====

290    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
If the student enters changes on the Web form and clicks the Submit button, the change data 
is transmitted to the server and a program starts running that validates the changes. If there are 
errors, an error message is sent to the web page. If the data are valid, the student record is updated 
and a Change Student Journal Record is written. After a valid update, a confirmation web page is 
sent to the browser, and the activity terminates.
Creating Activity Diagrams
Activity diagrams are created by asking what happens first, what happens second, and so on. You must 
determine whether activities are done in sequence or in parallel. If physical data flow diagrams (as 
described in Chapter 7) have been created, they may be examined to determine the sequence of 
FIGURE 10.9
This activity diagram shows three swimlanes: Client Web Page, Web Server, and Mainframe.
Create Change
Student Journal
Record
Update Student
Record
Valid DataValid Data
User ID and Password
Not Found
Exchange Data Placed in Message Queue
Record
Status
Valid Update
Cancel
Cancel
Record
Updated
Record
Written
Logon System
Client Web Page Web Server Mainframe
Receive Web
Form
Display Error
Message
Display Current
Student Data
Validate Changes
Valid Data Received
Enter Changes
Display
Error Message
Display
Conﬁrmation
Get Student
Record
Form Transmitted
Send Error Message
Web Form Sent
Web Form Received
Send Error Messages
Conﬁrmation Sent
Invalid Data Received
Validation Status


===== BOOK PAGE 291 =====

CHAPTER 10  •  OBJECT -ORIENTED SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN USING UML     291
activities. Look for places where decisions are made and ask what happens for each of the decision 
outcomes. Activity diagrams may be created by examining all the scenarios for a use case.
Each path through the various decisions included on the use case is a different scenario. In 
the main path would be Logon System, Receive Web Form, Get Student Record, Display 
Current Student Data, Enter Changes, Validate Changes, Update Student Record, Create 
Change Student Journal Record, and Display Confirmation.
This isn’t the only scenario that comes from this use case. Other scenarios may occur. One 
possibility could be Logon System, Receive Web Form, Get Student Record, and Display Error 
Message. Another scenario could be Logon System, Receive Web Form, Get Student Record, 
Display Current Student Data, Enter Changes, Validate Changes, and Display Error Message.
The swimlanes are useful to show how the data must be transmitted or converted, such as from 
Web to server or from server to mainframe. For example, the Change Student Record activity 
diagram has three swimlanes.
The swimlane on the left shows activities that occur on the client browser. Web pages must 
be created for these activities. The middle swimlane shows activities that happen on the server. 
Events, such as Form Transmitted, represent data transmitted from the browser to the server, and 
there must be programs on the server to receive and process the client data.
The swimlane on the right represents the mainframe computer. In large organizations it is 
typical for many Web applications to work with a mainframe computer. Much of the data in large 
organizations exists on mainframe databases, and an enormous number of mainframe programs 
are in existence.
When an event crosses the swimlane from the server to the mainframe computer, there must 
be a mechanism for transmitting the event data between the two platforms. Servers use a different 
format to represent data (ASCII) than do mainframe computers (EBCDIC). Middleware must be 
present to take care of the conversion. IBM computers often use an mqueue (for message queue). 
The mqueue receives data from the server programs, places it in a holding area, and calls a main-
frame program, usually written in a language called CICS. This program retrieves or updates the 
data and sends the results back to the mqueue.
In the activity diagram, the decision below the Get Student Record state is made on the 
mainframe computer. This means that the message queue receives either a “Not Found” mes -
sage or the database record for the student. If the mainframe simply placed the Record Status 
Received in the message queue and the decision was evaluated on the server, the server would 
have to call the mainframe again to obtain the valid data. This would slow down the response to 
the person waiting at the browser.
Swimlanes also help to divide up the tasks in a team. Web designers would be needed for 
the web pages displayed on the client browser. Other members would work with programming 
languages, such as Java, PHP, Ruby on Rails, Perl, or .NET, on the server. Mainframe CICS 
programmers would write programs that would work with the message queue. An analyst must 
ensure that the data that the various team members need are available and correctly defined. Some-
times the data in the message queue are contained in an XML document. If an outside organization 
is involved, the data also might be an XML document.
The activity diagram provides a map of a use case and allows an analyst to experiment with 
moving portions of the design to different platforms to ask, “What if?” for a variety of decisions. 
The use of unique symbols and swimlanes makes this diagram one that people want to use to 
communicate with others.
Activity diagrams may be used to construct test plans. Each event must be tested to see 
whether the activity diagram goes to the next state. Each decision must be tested to see whether 
the correct path is taken when the decision conditions occur.
Activity diagrams are not used for all use cases. Use an activity diagram when:
1. It helps to understand the activities of a use case.
2. The flow of control is complex.
3. There is a need to model workflow.
4. All scenarios need to be shown.
An analyst would not need an activity diagram when the use case is simple or there is a need to 
model the change of state.
Activity diagrams may also be used to model a lower-level method, showing detailed logic.


===== BOOK PAGE 292 =====

292    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
Repository Entries for an Activity Diagram
Each state and event may be further defined using a text description in a repository, which is a 
collection of text descriptions for the project. We describe states with information about the state, 
such as the web page name, elements on the web page, and so on. We describe events with the 
information that is required to communicate with the next state, such as the data from the Web 
form or the data that is put into a message queue, or with a description of the event that caused 
the transition, such as a button click.
SEQUENCE AND COMMUNICATION DIAGRAMS
An interaction diagram is either a sequence diagram or a communication diagram, both of which 
show essentially the same information. These diagrams, along with class diagrams, are used in a 
use case realization, which is a way to achieve or accomplish a use case.
Sequence Diagrams
A sequence diagram can illustrate a succession of interactions between classes or object instances 
over time. Sequence diagrams are often used to illustrate the processing described in use case 
scenarios. In practice, sequence diagrams are derived from use case analysis and are used 
in systems design to derive the interactions, relationships, and methods of the objects in the 
system. Sequence diagrams are used to show the overall pattern of the activities or interactions in 
a use case. Each use case scenario may create one sequence diagram, although sequence diagrams 
are not always created for minor scenarios.
finished goods. The automated warehouse uses a flatbed robot 
trolley. This robot is a four-wheel electric cart, similar to a golf 
cart except that it has no seats. Flatbed robot trolleys have a flat 
64 -foot×  cargo surface about 3 inches above ground level. 
These trolleys have a radio communications device that provides 
a real-time data link to a central warehouse computer. Flatbed 
trolleys have two sensors: a path sensor that detects a special type 
of paint and a motion sensor that detects movement. These trol-
leys follow painted paths around the factory floor. Special paint 
codes mark forks and branches in the paths, trolley start and stop 
points, and general location points.
The facility includes three loading dock stations and 10 worksta-
tions. Each station has a desktop computer connected to the central 
computer. When products are needed or are ready to be collected 
from a workstation, the central computer is informed by the worker 
at the station. The central computer then dispatches trolleys accord-
ingly. Each station has a drop point and a pickup point. Flatbed 
trolleys move about the factory picking up work at pickup points 
and dropping off work at drop points. The program that will run 
the trolleys must interact heavily with the existing job-scheduling 
program that helps schedule workstation tasks.
How should Lisa go about reusing Benito Pérez’s work on the 
monorail in their current task of creating a trolley object? Explain 
in two paragraphs.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 10.2 
Recycling the Programming Environment
“I feel like I’m writing the same code over and over again,” says 
Benito Pérez, a programmer working on a new automated ware -
house design. “I have written so many programs lately that deal 
with robotic-type things that control themselves: automated mail-
room trolleys, building surveillance robots, automatic pool clean-
ers, automatic lawn mowers, monorail trains, and now warehouse 
trolleys. They are all variations on a theme.”
Lisa Bernoulli, the project manager, has heard this sort of com-
plaint for years. She replies, “Oh, come on, Ben. These things aren’t 
really that close. How can you compare a mailroom robot, an auto-
mated warehouse, and a monorail train? I’ll bet less than 10 percent 
of the code is the same.”
“Look,” says Benito. “All three involve machines that have 
to find a starting point, follow a circuitous route, make stops for 
loading and unloading, and eventually go to a stopping point. All 
three have to make decisions at branches in their routes. All three 
have to avoid colliding with things. I’m tired of redesigning code 
that is largely familiar to me.”
“Hmmm,” Lisa muses as she looks over the basic require-
ments for the warehouse system and remembers the monorail 
system she and Benito had worked on last year. The require-
ments regarded a small-lot electronics manufacturing firm that 
was automating its warehouse and product movement system. 
The warehouse contains incoming parts, work in progress, and


===== BOOK PAGE 293 =====

CHAPTER 10  •  OBJECT -ORIENTED SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN USING UML     293
The symbols used in sequence diagrams are shown in Figure 10.10. Actors and classes or 
object instances are shown in boxes along the top of the diagram. The leftmost object is the start-
ing object and may be a person (for which a use case actor symbol is used), window, dialogue 
box, or other user interface. Some of the interactions are physical only, such as signing a contract. 
The top rectangles use indicators in the name to indicate whether the rectangle represents an 
object, a class, or a class and object.
objectName: A name with a colon after it represents an object.
:class A colon with a name after it represents a class.
objectName:class A name, followed by a colon and another name, 
represents an object in a class.
A vertical line represents the lifeline for the class or object, which corresponds to the time it is 
created through to when it is destroyed. An X on the bottom of the lifeline represents when the 
object is destroyed. A lateral bar or vertical rectangle on the lifeline shows the focus of control 
when the object is busy doing things.
Horizontal arrows show messages or signals that are sent between the classes. Messages 
belong to the receiving class. There are some variations in the message arrows. Solid arrowheads 
represent synchronous calls, which are the most common. These are used when the sending 
class waits for a response from the receiving class, and control is returned to the sending class 
when the class receiving the message finishes executing. Half (or open) arrowheads represent 
asynchronous calls, or those that are sent without an expectation of returning to the sending class. 
An example would be using a menu to run a program. A return is shown as an arrow, sometimes 
with a dashed line. Messages are labeled using one of the following formats:
• The name of the message followed by empty parentheses: messageName().
• The name of the message followed by parameters in parentheses: 
messageName(parameter1, parameter2 . . .).
• The message name followed by the parameter type, parameter name, and any default value 
for the parameter in parentheses: messageName(parameterType:parameterName(defau
ltValue)). Parameter types indicate the type of data, such as string, number, or date.
• The message may be a stereotype, such as «Create», indicating that a new object is created 
as a result of the message.
FIGURE 10.10
Specialized symbols used to draw 
a sequence diagram.
method(Parameter)
return
asynchronousSignal( )
::Class Object::Class


===== BOOK PAGE 294 =====

294    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
Timing in the sequence diagram is displayed from top to bottom; the first interaction is drawn 
at the top of the diagram, and the interaction that occurs last is drawn at the bottom of the diagram. 
The interaction arrows begin at the bar of the actor or object that initiates the interaction, and they 
end pointing at the bar of the actor or object that receives the interaction request. The starting actor, 
class, or object is shown on the left. This may be the actor that initiates the activity or it may be 
a class representing the user interface.
Figure 10.11 is a simplified example of a sequence diagram for a use case that admits a student 
to a university. On the left is the newStudentUserInterface  class that is used to obtain stu -
dent information. The initialize() message is sent to the Student class, which creates a new 
student record and returns the student number. To simplify the diagram, the parameters that are 
sent to the Student class have been omitted but would include the student name, address, and so 
on. The next activity is to send a selectDorm message to the Dorm class. This message would 
include dorm selection information, such as a health dorm or other student requirements. The 
Dorm class returns the dorm name and room number. The third activity is to send a selectProgram 
message to the Program class, including the program name and other course of study information. 
The program advisor name is returned to the newStudentUserInterface class. A studentCom-
plete message is sent to the Student class with the dorm, advisor name, and other information.
A sequence diagram can be used to translate a use case scenario into a visual tool for systems 
analysis. The initial sequence diagram used in systems analysis shows the actors and classes in 
the system and the interactions between them for a specific process. You can use this version 
of the sequence diagram to verify processes with the business area experts who have assisted 
you in developing the system requirements. A sequence diagram emphasizes the time ordering 
(sequence) of messages.
During the systems design phase, sequence diagrams are refined to derive the methods and 
interactions between classes. Messages from one class are used to identify class relationships. 
The actors in the earlier sequence diagrams are translated to interfaces, and class interactions are 
translated to class methods. Class methods used to create instances of other classes and to perform 
other internal system functions become apparent in the system design using sequence diagrams.
Communication Diagrams
Communication diagrams were introduced in UML 2.0, and as of this writing we are on UML 2.5. 
Their original name in UML 1.x was collaboration diagrams. A communication diagram describes 
the interactions of two or more things in the system that perform a behavior that is more than any 
FIGURE 10.11
A sequence diagram for student 
admission. Sequence diagrams 
emphasize the time ordering of 
messages.
::Student
initialize( )
selectDorm( )
studentComplete( )
return dormRoom
return studentNumber
::dorm ::program::newStudent
UserInterface
selectProgram( )
return programAdvisor


===== BOOK PAGE 295 =====

CHAPTER 10  •  OBJECT -ORIENTED SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN USING UML     295
one of the things can do alone. For instance, a car can be broken down into several thousand indi-
vidual parts. The parts are put together to form the major subsystems of the vehicle: the engine, 
the transmission, the brake system, and so forth. The individual parts of the car can be thought of 
as classes because they have distinct attributes and functions. The individual parts of the engine 
form a collaboration because they “communicate” with each other to make the engine run when 
the driver steps on the accelerator.
A communication diagram is made up of three parts: objects (also called participants), com-
munication links, and messages that can be passed along those links. Communication diagrams 
show the same information as a sequence diagram but may be more difficult to read. To show time 
ordering, you must indicate a sequence number and describe the message.
A communication diagram emphasizes the organization of objects, whereas a sequence 
diagram emphasizes the time ordering of messages. A communication diagram will show a path 
to indicate how one object is linked to another.
Some UML modeling software, such as IBM’s Rational Rose, will automatically convert 
a sequence diagram to a communication diagram or a communication diagram to a sequence 
diagram with the click of a button. A communication diagram for the student admission example 
is illustrated in Figure 10.12. Each rectangle represents an object or a class. Connecting lines show 
the classes that need to collaborate or work with each other. The messages sent from one class to 
another are shown along connecting lines. Messages are numbered to show the time sequence. 
Return values also may be included and numbered to indicate when they are returned within the 
time sequence.
CLASS DIAGRAMS
Object-oriented methodologies work to discover classes, attributes, methods, and relationships 
between classes. Because programming occurs at the class level, defining classes is one of the most 
important object-oriented analysis tasks. Class diagrams show the static features of the system and 
do not represent any particular processing. A class diagram also shows the nature of the relation-
ships between classes.
A class is represented by a rectangle on a class diagram. In the simplest format, the rectangle 
may include only the class name, but it may also include the attributes and methods. Attributes are 
what the class knows about characteristics of the objects, and methods (also called operations) 
are what the class knows about how to do things. Methods are small sections of code that work 
with the attributes.
Figure 10.13 illustrates a class diagram for course offerings. Notice that the name is cen-
tered at the top of the class, usually in boldface type. The area directly below the name shows 
FIGURE 10.12
A communication diagram for student admission. Communication diagrams show the same information 
that is depicted in a sequence diagram but emphasize the organization of objects rather than the time 
ordering.
1:initialize( )
3:selectProgram( )
2:selectDorm( )
4:studentComplete( )
::student ::program
::dorm
::newStudent
UserInterface


===== BOOK PAGE 296 =====

296    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
the attributes, and the bottom portion lists the methods. The class diagram shows data storage 
requirements as well as processing requirements. Later in the chapter we discuss the meaning of 
the diamond symbols shown in this figure.
The attributes (or properties) are usually designated as private, or only available in the object. 
This is represented on a class diagram by a minus sign in front of the attribute name. Attributes 
may also be protected, indicated with a pound symbol (#). These attributes are hidden from all 
classes except immediate subclasses. Under rare circumstances, an attribute is public, meaning 
that it is visible to other objects outside its class. Making attributes private means that the attributes 
are only available to outside objects through the class methods, a technique called encapsulation, 
or information hiding.
A class diagram may show just the class name; or the class name and attributes; or the class 
name, attributes, and methods. Showing only the class name is useful when the diagram is very 
complex and includes many classes. If the diagram is simpler, attributes and methods may be 
included. When attributes are included, there are three ways to show the attribute information. The 
simplest is to include only the attribute name, which takes the least amount of space.
The type of data (such as string, double, integer, or date) may be included on a class diagram. 
The most complete descriptions would include an equal sign ( )=  after the type of data, followed 
by the initial value for the attribute. Figure 10.14 illustrates class attributes.
If the attribute must take on one of a finite number of values, such as a student type with 
values of F for full time, P for part time, and N for nonmatriculating, these may be included in 
curly brackets separated by commas: studentType:char{F,P,N}.
Information hiding means that objects’ methods must be available to other classes, so methods 
are often public, meaning that they may be invoked from other classes. On a class diagram, public 
messages (and any public attributes) are shown with a plus sign ( )+  in front of them. Methods also 
have parentheses after them, indicating that data may be passed as parameters along with the mes-
sage. The message parameters, as well as the type of data, may be included on the class diagram.
There are two types of methods: standard and custom. Standard methods are basic things that 
all classes of objects know how to do, such as create a new object instance. Custom methods are 
designed for a specific class.
FIGURE 10.13
A class diagram for course offerings. The filled-in diamonds show aggregation, and the empty diamond 
shows a whole/part relationship.
Department
–departmentName
–departmentChair
+addDepartment( )
+viewDepartment( )
Course
–courseNumber
–courseDescription
–numberOfCredits
–departmentNumber
+addCourse( )
+changeCourse( )
+ﬁndCourse( )
Textbook
–ISBN
–author
–title
–edition
–publisher
–required
+addText( )
+changeText( )
+ﬁndText( )
+removeText( )
Exam
–examNumber
–examName
–examPoints
–examVersion
+addExam( )
+changeExam( )
+ﬁndExam( )
Assignment
–assignmentNumber
–assignmentDescription
–assignmentPoints
–assignmentDueDate
+addAssignment( )
+changeAssignment( )
+viewAssignment( )
has a
is a
part
of
is a
part
of
consists
of
is for a
1 1..
consists
of


===== BOOK PAGE 297 =====

CHAPTER 10  •  OBJECT -ORIENTED SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN USING UML     297
Method Overloading
Method overloading refers to including the same method (or operation) several times in a class. 
The method signature includes the method name and the parameters included with the method. The 
same method may be defined more than once in a given class, as long as the parameters sent as 
part of the message are different; that is, there must be a different message signature. There may 
be a different number of parameters, or the parameters might be a different type, such as a number  
in one method and a string in another method. An example of method overloading may be found in 
the use of a plus sign in many programming languages. If the attributes on either side of the plus 
sign are numbers, the two numbers are added. If the attributes are strings of characters, the strings 
are concatenated to form one long string.
In a bank deposit example, a deposit slip could contain just the amount of the deposit, in 
which case the bank would deposit the entire amount, or it could contain the deposit amount and 
the amount of cash to be returned. Both situations would use a deposit check method, but the 
parameters (one situation would also request the amount of cash to be returned) would be different.
Types of Classes
Classes fall into four categories: entity, interface, abstract, and control.
Entity Classes. Entity classes represent real-world items, such as people, things, and so on. 
Entity classes are the entities represented on an entity-relationship (E-R) diagram. Computer-aided 
software engineering (CASE) tools such as Visible Analyst will allow you to create a UML entity 
class from an entity on an E-R diagram.
An analyst needs to determine which attributes to include in the classes. Each object has many 
attributes, but a class should include only those that are used by the organization. For example, 
when creating an entity class for a student at a college, you would need to know attributes that 
identify the student, such as home and campus address, as well as grade point average, total 
credits, and so on. If you were keeping track of the same student for an online clothing store, you 
would have to know basic identifying information, as well as other descriptive attributes such as 
measurements or color preferences.
Boundary, or Interface, Classes. Boundary classes, or interface classes, provide a means for users 
to work with the system. There are two broad categories of interface classes: human and system.
A human interface may be a display, window, Web form, dialogue box, menu, list box, or 
other display control. It may also be a touch-tone telephone, bar code, or other ways for users to 
interact with the system. Human interfaces should be prototyped (as described in Chapter 6), and 
a storyboard is often used to model the sequence of interactions.
System interfaces involve sending data to or receiving data from other systems. This may 
include databases in the organization. If data are sent to an external organization, they are often 
in the form of XML files or other well-published interfaces with clearly defined messages and 
protocols. External interfaces are the least stable because there is often little or no control over an 
external partner who may alter the format of the message or data.
XML helps to provide standardization because an external partner may add new elements 
to the XML document, but a corporation transforming the data to a format that may be used  
to append to an internal database may simply choose to ignore the additional elements without 
any problems.
FIGURE 10.14
An extended Student class that 
shows the type of data and, in 
some cases, its initial value or 
default value.
Student
studentNumber: Integer
lastName: String
ﬁrstName: String
creditsCompleted: Decimal=0.0
gradePointAverage: Decimal=0.0
currentStudent: Boolean=Y
dateEnrolled: Date=
new( )
changeStudent( )
viewStudent( )


===== BOOK PAGE 298 =====

298    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
The attributes of these classes are those found on the display or report. The methods are those 
required to work with the display or to produce the report.
Abstract Classes. Abstract classes are classes that cannot be directly instantiated. Abstract 
classes are linked to concrete classes in a gen/spec relationship. The name of an abstract class is 
usually denoted in italics.
Control Classes. Control classes, or active classes, are used to control the flow of activities, and 
they act as a coordinator when implementing classes. To create reusable classes, a class diagram 
may include many small control classes. Control classes are often derived during system design.
Often a new control class will be created just to make another class reusable. An example 
would be the logon process. There might be one control class that handles the logon user interface, 
containing the logic to check the user ID and password. The problem that arises is that the logon 
control class is designed for a specific logon display. By creating a logon control class that handles 
just the unique logon display, the data may be passed to a more general validation control class, 
which performs a check on user IDs and passwords received from many other control classes 
receiving messages from specific user interfaces. This increases reusability and isolates the logon 
verification methods from the user interface handling methods.
The rules for creating sequence diagrams are that all interface classes must be connected to a 
control class. Similarly, all entity classes must be connected to a control class. Interface classes, 
unlike the other two, are never connected directly to entity classes.
Defining Messages and Methods
Each message may be defined using a notation similar to that described for the data dictionary   
(as shown in Chapter 8). The definition would include a list of the parameters passed with the 
message as well as the elements contained in the return message. The methods may have logic 
defined using structured English, a decision table, or a decision tree, as depicted in Chapter 9.
The analyst can use the techniques of horizontal balancing with any class method. All the 
data returned from an entity class must be obtained either from the attributes stored in the entity 
class, from the parameters passed on the message sent to the class, or as a result of a calculation 
performed by the method of the class. The method logic and parameters must be examined to 
ensure that the method logic has all the information required to complete its work.
ENHANCING SEQUENCE DIAGRAMS
Once a class diagram is drawn, it may be desirable to go back to the sequence diagram and include 
special symbols for each of the different types of classes introduced in the last section. Sequence 
diagrams in particular can be overbearing if an analyst doesn’t have a systematic approach to 
drawing them. The following steps are a useful approach to enhancing a sequence diagram:
1. Include the actor from the use case diagram in the enhanced sequence diagram. This will 
be a stick figure from the use case diagram. There may be an additional actor on the right 
side of the diagram, such as a credit card company or bank.
2. Define one or more interface classes for each actor. Each actor should have their own inter-
face class.
3. Create prototype web pages for all human interfaces.
4. Ensure that each use case has one control class, although more may be created during the 
detailed design. Look for that control class and include it in the sequence diagram.
5. Examine the use case to see what entity classes are present. Include these on the diagram.
6. Realize that the sequence diagram may be modified again when doing detailed design, such 
as creating additional web pages or control classes (one for each Web form submitted).
7. To obtain a greater degree of reuse, consider moving methods from a control class to an 
entity class.
A Class Example for the Web
Classes may be represented using special symbols for entity, boundary (or interface), and con-
trol classes. These are called stereotypes, an extension to UML, which are special symbols that


===== BOOK PAGE 299 =====

CHAPTER 10  •  OBJECT -ORIENTED SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN USING UML     299
may be used during analysis but are often used when performing object-oriented design. They 
give an analyst freedom to play with the design to optimize reusability.
The different types of classes are often used when working in the systems design phase. 
Figure 10.15 is an example of a sequence diagram representing a student viewing personal and 
course information. In the diagram, :View Student User Interface is an example of an interface 
class; :Student, :Section, and :Course are examples of entity classes; and :View Student 
Interface Controller and :Calculate Grade Point Average are control classes.
The student is shown on the left as an actor, and the student provides a userLogon to the 
:View Student User Interface class. This is a web form that obtains the student’s user ID and 
FIGURE 10.15
A sequence diagram for using two web pages: one for student information and one for course information.
:View
Student
User
Interface
:View
Student
Interface
Controller
:Student :Section :Course
:Calculate
Grade
Point
Average
Student
provide
userLogon logon( ) getStudent( )
return
studentData
return student-
WebPage
return
courseWebPage
display
courseWebPage
display student-
WebPage
click
nextButton
send
studentNumber( ) getSection( )
return
sectionGrade
calculateGPA( )
getCourse( )
return credits
getCredits( )
return courseData
return GPA
Control
class
Boundary
or
interface
class
Entity
class


===== BOOK PAGE 300 =====

300    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
password. When the student clicks the Submit button, the Web form is passed to the :View 
Student Interface Controller. This class is responsible for the coordination of sending messages 
and receiving returned information from all the other classes.
The :View Student Interface Controller  sends a getStudent()  message to the :Student  
class, which reads a database table and proceeds to return the studentData.
The studentWebPage is returned to the :View Student User Interface, which displays the 
information in the Web browser. At the bottom of the page is a nextButton that the student clicks 
to view courses. When the user clicks this button, it sends a Web form to the :View Student 
Interface Controller. This form contains the studentNumber(), sent along with the student-
WebPage, and is used to send a message to the :Section class to obtain the section grade. If the 
studentNumber() was not automatically sent, it would mean that the student would have to enter 
their studentNumber() again, which would not be a satisfactory user interface because it involves 
redundant keying. Notice that the :Student class is not involved and that the focus of control  
(the vertical bar that is connected to the :Student class) ends before the second set of activities (the  
horizontal arrows pointing to the right) begins.
The :View Student Interface Controller class sends a getSection() message to the :Section 
class, which returns a sectionGrade. The :Section class also sends a calculateGPA() message 
to the :Calculate Grade Point Average class, which sends a message back to the :Course class. 
The :Course class returns the credits, which enables the :Calculate Grade Point Average class 
to determine the GPA and return it to the :View Student Interface Controller.
The :View Student Interface Controller would repeat sending messages to the :Section class 
until all sections for the student have been included. At this time, the :View Student Interface 
Controller would send the courseWebPage to the :View Student User Interface class, which 
would display the information in the browser.
Using the user interface, control, and entity classes also allows the analyst to explore and 
play with the design. The design mentioned previously would display all the student personal 
information on one page and the course information on a second page. The analyst may modify 
the design so that the student personal information and the course information appear on one web 
page. These two possible scenarios would be reviewed with users to determine the best option.
One of the difficulties for the analyst is to determine how to include the studentNumber after 
clicking the Next button because the :Student class is no longer available. There are three ways 
to store and retransmit data from a web page:
1. Include the information in the URL displaying in the address or location area of the 
browser. In this case, the location line might read something like the following: http://www.
cpu.edu/student/studentinq.html?studentNumber=12345. Everything after the question 
mark is data that may be used by the class methods. This means of storing data is easy to 
implement and is often used in search engines.
There are several drawbacks to using this method, and an analyst must use due caution. 
The first concern is privacy; anyone can read the Web address. If the application involves 
medical information, credit card numbers, and so on, this is not a good choice. Most 
browsers also display previous Web address data in subsequent sessions if the user enters 
the first few characters, and the information may be compromised, leading to identity theft. 
A second disadvantage is that the data are usually lost after the user closes the browser.
2. Store the information in a cookie, a small file stored on the client (browser) computer. 
Using cookies is the only way to store data that have persistence, existing beyond the 
current browser session. This enables the web page to display a message such as “Welcome 
back, Robin. If you are not Robin, click here.” Cookies usually store primary key account 
numbers, but not credit card numbers or other private information. Cookies are limited to 
20 per domain (such as www.cio.com), and each cookie must be 4,000 or fewer characters.
An analyst must work with other business units to determine who needs to use 
cookies, and there must be some central control over the names used in the cookies. If the 
organization needs to have more than 20 cookies, a common solution is to create different 
domain names used by the organization, such as support.cpu.edu or instruction.cpu.edu.
3. Use hidden web form fields. These fields usually contain data that are sent by the server, are 
invisible, and do not occupy any space on the web page. In the preceding example, the :View 
Student Interface Controller class added a hidden field containing the studentNumber


===== BOOK PAGE 301 =====

CHAPTER 10  •  OBJECT -ORIENTED SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN USING UML     301
to the studentWebPage form along with the nextButton. When the student clicks the 
nextButton, the studentNumber is sent to the server, and the :View Student Interface 
Controller knows which student to obtain course and grade information for. The data in 
hidden forms is not saved from one browser session to another, so privacy is maintained.
Presentation, Business, and Persistence Layers in Sequence Diagrams
In the previous example, we showed all the classes in the same diagram. When it comes to writing 
code for systems, it has been useful to look at sequence diagrams as having three distinct layers:
1. The presentation layer, which represents what the user sees. This layer contains the 
interface or boundary classes.
2. The business layer, which contains the unique rules for this application. This layer contains 
the control classes.
3. The persistence, or data access, layer, which describes obtaining and storing data. This 
layer contains the entity classes.
Ideally, program code would be written separately for each of these layers.
With the introduction of Ajax, the lines became blurred. Ajax, an acronym for Asynchro-
nous JavaScript and XML, is a collection of techniques that allows Web applications to retrieve 
information from the server without altering the display of the current page. This turns out to be 
an advantage because the entire web page does not need to be reloaded when it gets additional 
data from the server.
Before Ajax was created, a user visiting a website would answer some questions by entering data 
on a Web-based form and then wait until a new page is loaded. This was necessary because the code 
to validate, get the data, and then answer the user resided on the server. With the advent of Ajax, the 
web page is updated rapidly because much of the validation and other control logic is now included 
in the browser JavaScript code or on the client side. This means that business rules are included in 
both the boundary and the control class, so it might not be possible to have three distinct layers.
ENHANCING CLASS DIAGRAMS
The class symbols may also be used on class and communication diagrams. Figure 10.16 illus-
trates a class diagram for a student viewing personal and course information on web pages. Each 
class has attributes and methods (which are not shown on diagrams that use this notation).
If the class is a user interface type of class, the attributes are the controls (or fields) on the 
screen or form. The methods would be those that work with the screen, such as submit or reset. 
They might also be JavaScript for a web page because the code works directly with the web page.
If the class is a control class, the attributes would be those needed to implement the class, such 
as variables used just in the control class. The methods would be those used to perform calcula-
tions, make decisions, and send messages to other classes.
If the class is an entity class, the attributes represent those stored for the entity and the 
methods working directly with the entity, such as creating a new instance, modifying, deleting, 
obtaining, or printing.
A website may use a combination of many different classes to accomplish user objectives. 
For example, a website may use JavaScript to prevalidate data, then pass data to the server control 
classes, which perform thorough validation, including obtaining data. The server control classes 
may in turn send JavaScript back to the web page to do some formatting. It is not uncommon to 
have a Web application involve many classes, some of them containing only one line of code in a 
method, in order to achieve the goal of reusability.
Relationships
Another way to enhance class diagrams is to show relationships. Relationships are connections 
between classes, similar to those found on an E-R diagram. These are shown as lines connecting 
classes on a class diagram. There are two categories of relationships: associations and whole/part 
relationships.
Associations. The simplest type of relationship is an association, or a structural connection 
between classes or objects. Associations are shown as a simple line on a class diagram. The end


===== BOOK PAGE 302 =====

302    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
points of the line are labeled with a symbol indicating multiplicity, which is the same as cardinal-
ity on an E-R diagram. A zero represents none, a one represents one and only one, and an asterisk 
represents many. The notation 0..1 represents from zero to one, and the notation 1..* represents 
from one to many. Associations are illustrated in Figure 10.17.
Class diagrams do not restrict the lower limit for an association. For example, an association 
might be 5..*, indicating that a minimum of five must be present. The same is true for upper limits. 
For example, the number of courses a student is currently enrolled in may be 1..10, representing 
from 1 to 10 courses. It can also include a range of values separated by commas, such as 2, 3, 4. 
In the UML model, associations are usually labeled with a descriptive name.
Association classes are used to break up a many-to-many association between classes. These 
are similar to associative entities on an E-R diagram. Student and Course have a many-to-many 
relationship, which is resolved by adding an association class called Section between the classes 
of Student and Course. Figure 10.18 illustrates an association class called Section, shown with 
a dotted line connected to the many-to-many relationship line.
An object in a class may have a relationship to other objects in the same class; this is called 
a reflexive association. An example would be a task having a precedent task or an employee 
supervising another employee. This is shown as an association line connecting the class to itself, 
with labels indicating the role names, such as task and precedent task.
Whole/Part Relationships. A whole/part relationship occurs when one class represents a whole 
object and other classes represent parts of that object. The whole acts as a container for the parts. 
These relationships are shown on a class diagram by a line with a diamond on one end. The dia-
mond is connected to the object that is the whole. Whole/part relationships (as well as aggregation, 
discussed later) are shown in Figure 10.19.
A whole/part relationship may be an entity object that has distinct parts, such as a com-
puter system that includes the computer, printer, display, and so on, or an automobile that has an 
engine, a brake system, a transmission, and so on. Whole/part relationships also may be used to 
describe a user interface, in which one GUI screen contains a series of objects such as lists, boxes, 
or radio buttons, or perhaps a header, body, and footer area. Whole/part relationships have three 
categories: aggregation, collection, and composition.
FIGURE 10.16
A class diagram for the studentWebPage, using special class symbols.
Student
:Student :Course
:View
Student
Interface
Controller
:Section
:Calculate
Grade
Point
Average
:View
Student
User
Interface


===== BOOK PAGE 303 =====

CHAPTER 10  •  OBJECT -ORIENTED SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN USING UML     303
Aggregation An aggregation is often described as a “has a” relationship. Aggregation provides 
a means of showing that the whole object is composed of the sum of its parts (other objects). 
In the student enrollment example, the department has a course, and the course is for a  
department. This is a weaker relationship because a department may be changed or removed 
and the course may still exist. A computer package may not be available any longer, but the 
printers and other components still exist. The diamond at the end of the relationship line is 
not filled in.
Collection A collection consists of a whole and its members. This may be a voting district with 
voters or a library with books. The voters or books may change, but the whole retains its identity. 
This is a weak association.
FIGURE 10.17
Types of associations that may 
occur in class diagrams.
Graduate Student
–studentNumber
–creditsCompleted
–gradePointAverage
–department
–major
–thesisNumber
–advisor
+acceptStudent( )
+viewStudent( )
+changeStudent( )
+graduateStudent( )
Thesis
–thesisNumber
–studentNumber
–thesisTitle
–dateStarted
–completionDate
–approvalDate
–approvedBy
+addThesis( )
+change( )
+approveThesis( )
1 1
has
Student
–studentNumber
–creditsCompleted
–gradePointAverage
–department
–major
+initialize( )
+viewStudent( )
+changeStudent( )
+graduateStudent( )
Course
–courseNumber
–courseDescription
–numberOfCredits
–departmentNumber
+addCourse( )
+changeCourse( )
+ﬁndCourse( )
1 1..
enrolls in
Student
–studentNumber
–creditsCompleted
–gradePointAverage
–department
–major
+initialize( )
+viewStudent( )
+changeStudent( )
+graduateStudent( )
Dorm Room
–dormName
–roomNumber
–roomSize
–occupantGender
–numberVacancies
+addRoom( )
+changeRoom( )
+ﬁndRoom( )
+changeVacancy( )
1 0..
is assigned to
Student
–studentNumber
–creditsCompleted
–gradePointAverage
–department
–major
+initialize( )
+viewStudent( )
+changeStudent( )
+graduateStudent( )
Volunteer Activity
–activityNumber
–activityDescription
–activityOrganization
–activityDate
–studentNumber
+addActivity( )
+changeActivity( )
+ﬁndActivity( )
+addVolunteer( )
1
participates in


===== BOOK PAGE 304 =====

304    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
Composition Composition, a whole/part relationship in which the whole has a responsibility for 
the part, is a stronger relationship and is usually shown with a filled-in diamond. Keywords 
for composition are one class “always contains” another class. If the whole is deleted, all parts 
are deleted. An example would be an insurance policy with riders. If the policy is canceled, the 
insurance riders are also canceled. In a database, the referential integrity would be set to delete 
cascading child records. In a university there is a composition relationship between a course and 
an assignment as well as between a course and an exam. If the course is deleted, assignments 
and exams are deleted as well.
FIGURE 10.19
An example of whole/part and 
aggregation relationships.
Student
–studentNumber
–creditsCompleted
–gradePointAverage
–department
–major
–minor
+changeStudent( )
+ﬁndStudent( )
+graduateStudent( )
+initialize( )
+studentComplete( )
+viewStudent( )
Campus Organization
–organizationNumber
–organizationName
–organizationType
–president
–treasurer
–secretary
–accountBalance
–numberOfMembers
+change( )
+changeOﬃcers( )
+new( )
Fund Raising Activity
–activityNumber
–activityDescription
–activityType
–amountSpent
–amountReceived
–dateCompleted
+change( )
+new( )
+recordAmount( )
FIGURE 10.18
An example of an associative 
class in which a particular section 
defines the relationship between a 
student and a course.
Student
–studentNumber
–creditsCompleted
–gradePointAverage
–department
–major
–minor
+changeStudent( )
+ﬁndStudent( )
+graduateStudent( )
+initialize( )
+studentComplete( )
+viewStudent( )
Course
–courseNumber
–courseDescription
–numberOfCredits
–departmentNumber
+addCourse( )
+changeCourse( )
+ﬁndCourse( )
Section
–studentNumber
–courseNumber
–year
–semester
–grade
+addSection( )
+changeGrade( )
+enrollStudent( )
+recordGrade( )
+withdrawStudent( )
1.. 0..
hastakes


===== BOOK PAGE 305 =====

CHAPTER 10  •  OBJECT -ORIENTED SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN USING UML     305
Generalization/Specialization (Gen/Spec) Diagrams
A generalization/specialization diagram may be considered to be an enhanced class diagram. 
Sometimes it is necessary to separate the generalizations from the specific instances. As we men-
tioned at the beginning of this chapter, a koala bear is part of a class of marsupials, which is part 
of a class of animals. Sometimes we need to distinguish whether a koala bear is an animal or a 
koala bear is a type of animal. Furthermore, a koala bear can be a stuffed toy animal. We often 
need to clarify these subtleties.
Generalization. A generalization describes a relationship between a general kind of thing 
and a more specific kind of thing. This type of relationship is often described as an “is a” 
relationship. For example, a car is a  vehicle, and a truck is a  vehicle. In this case, vehicle is 
the general thing, whereas car and truck are the more specific things. Generalization relation-
ships are used for modeling class inheritance and specialization. A general class is sometimes 
called a superclass, base class, or parent class; a specialized class is called a subclass, derived 
class, or child class.
Inheritance. Several classes may have the same attributes or methods. When this occurs, a 
general class is created containing the common attributes and methods. The specialized class 
inherits or receives the attributes and methods of the general class. In addition, the specialized 
class has attributes and methods that are unique and only defined in the specialized class. Creating 
generalized classes and allowing the specialized class to inherit the attributes and methods helps 
to foster reuse because the code is used many times. It also helps to maintain existing program 
code. This allows the analyst to define attributes and methods once but use them many times, in 
each inherited class.
One of the special features of the object-oriented approach is the creation and maintenance 
of large class libraries that are available in multiple languages. So, for instance, a programmer 
using Java, .NET, or C# will have access to a huge number of classes that have already been 
developed.
Polymorphism. Polymorphism (meaning “many forms”), or method overriding (not the same 
as method overloading), is the capability of an object-oriented program to have several versions 
of the same method with the same name within a superclass/subclass relationship. The subclass 
inherits a parent method but may add to it or modify it. The subclass may change the type of data 
or change how the method works. For example, a customer might receive an additional volume 
discount, and the method for calculating the order total will be modified. The subclass method is 
said to override the superclass method.
When attributes or methods are defined more than once, the most specific one (the lowest 
in the class hierarchy) is used. The compiled program walks up the chain of classes, looking for 
methods.
Abstract Classes. Abstract classes are general classes and are used when gen/spec is included in 
the design. The general class becomes the abstract class. The abstract class has no direct objects 
or class instances and is only used in conjunction with specialized classes. Abstract classes usually 
have attributes and may have a few methods.
Figure 10.20 is an example of a gen/spec class diagram. The arrow points to the general 
class, or superclass. Often the lines connecting two or more subclasses to a superclass are 
joined using one arrow pointing to the superclass, but these could be shown as separate arrows 
as well. Notice that the top level is Person, representing any person. The attributes describe 
qualities that all people at a university have. The methods allow the class to change the name 
and the address (including telephone and email address). This is an abstract class, with no 
instances.
Student and Employee are subclasses because they have different attributes and methods. 
An employee does not have a grade point average and a student does not have a salary. This is a 
simple version and does not include employees who are students and students who work for the 
university. If these were added, they would be subclasses of the Employee and Student classes. 
Employee has two subclasses, Faculty and Administrator, because there are different attributes 
and methods for each of these specialized classes.


===== BOOK PAGE 306 =====

306    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
Subclasses have special verbs to define them. These are often run-on words, such as isa for 
“is a,” isakinda for “is a kind of,” and canbea for “can be a.” There is no distinction between “is 
a” and “is an”; they both use isa.
isa Faculty isa Employee
isakinda Administrator isakinda Employee
canbea Employee canbea Faculty
Identifying Abstract Classes. You may be able to identify abstract classes by looking to see if a 
number of classes or database tables have the same elements or if a number of classes have the 
same methods. You can create a general class by pulling out the common attributes and methods, 
or you might create a specialized class for the unique attributes and methods. Using a banking 
example, a withdrawal, a payment on a loan, or a check written, will all have the same method—
subtracting money from the customer balance.
Finding Classes. There are a number of ways to determine classes. They may be discovered 
during interviewing or joint application design (JAD) sessions (described in Chapter 4), during 
facilitated team sessions, or from brainstorming sessions. Analyzing documents and memos may 
also reveal classes. One of the easiest ways is to use the CRC method described previously in this 
FIGURE 10.20
A gen/spec diagram is a refined 
form of a class diagram.
Person
–lastName
–ﬁrstName
–street
–apartment
–city
–state
–zip
–telephone
–cellPhone
–email
+changeAddress( )
+changeName( )
Student
–studentNumber
–creditsCompleted
–gradePointAverage
–department
–major
–minor
+changeStudent( )
+ﬁndStudent( )
+graduateStudent( )
+initialize( )
+studentComplete( )
+viewStudent( )
Employee
–employeeNumber
–salary
–YTDGross
–YTDWithholding
–dateHired
–department
+changeEmployee( )
+printTaxInformation( )
+producePaycheck( )
canbea
isa
canbea
isa
Faculty
–degree
–position
–webURL
+changePosition( )
+changeURL( )
Administrator
–title
+changeEmployee( )
canbea
isa
canbea
isakinda


===== BOOK PAGE 307 =====

CHAPTER 10  •  OBJECT -ORIENTED SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN USING UML     307
chapter. An analyst should also examine use cases, looking for nouns. Each noun may lead to a 
candidate or potential class. They are called candidate classes because some of the nouns may be 
attributes of a class.
Each class should exist for a distinct object that has a clear definition. An analyst should 
ask what the class knows (the attributes) and what the class knows how to do (the methods). The 
analyst should identify class relationships and the multiplicity for each end of the relationship. If 
the relationship is many-to-many, the analyst should create an intersection or associative class, 
similar to the associative entity in an E-R diagram.
Determining Class Methods. An analyst must determine class attributes and methods. Attributes 
are easy to identify, but the methods that work with the attributes may be more difficult to define. 
Some of the methods are standard and are always associated with a class, such as the new() 
method or the «create» method, which is an extension to UML called a stereotype. (The « » 
symbols are not simply pairs of greater than and less than symbols; they are called guillemets 
or chevrons.)
Another useful way to determine methods is to examine a create, read, update, delete (CRUD) 
matrix (see Chapter 7). Figure 10.21 illustrates a CRUD matrix for course offerings. Each letter 
requires a different method. If there is a C for create, you add a new() method. If there is a U 
for update, you add an update() or change() method. If there is a D for delete, you add a delete() 
or remove() method. If there is an R for read, you add methods for finding, viewing, or printing. 
In the example shown, the textbook class would need a create method to add a textbook and a 
read method to initiate a course inquiry, change a textbook, or find a textbook. If a textbook were 
replaced, an update method would be needed, and if a textbook were removed, a delete method 
would be required.
FIGURE 10.21
A CRUD matrix can be used to 
help determine what methods are 
needed. This CRUD matrix is 
used to determine the methods and 
operations for course offerings.
Activity Department Course Textbook Exam
Add Department C
View Department
Add Course
C
Change Course
RU
Course Inquiry R R R R
R
C
U
R
RAdd Textbook
Change Textbook R
R
R
R
R
R
Find Textbook
Remove Textbook R
Add Assignment R
Change Assignment R
Assignment
D
C
RU
View Assignment R R
Add Exam R R
Change Exam R RU
View Exam R R


===== BOOK PAGE 308 =====

308    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
Messages. To accomplish useful work, most classes need to communicate with one another. An 
object in one class can send information to an object in another class by using a message, similar 
to a call in a traditional programming language. A message also acts as a command, telling the 
receiving class to do something. A message consists of the name of the method in the receiving 
class, as well as the attributes (parameters or arguments) that are passed with the method name. 
The receiving class must have a method corresponding to the message name.
Messages are sent from one class to another, so they may be thought of as an output or an 
input. The first class must supply the parameters included with the message, and the second class 
uses the parameters. If a physical child data flow diagram exists for the problem domain, it may 
help to discover methods. The data flow from one primitive process to another represents the 
message, and the primitive processes should be examined as candidate methods.
STATECHART DIAGRAMS
Using a statechart, or state transition, diagram is another way to determine class methods. It is 
used to examine the different states that an object may have.
A statechart diagram is created for a single class. Typically, objects are created, go through 
changes, and are deleted or removed.
Objects exist in these various states, which are the conditions of an object at a specific time. 
An object’s attribute values define the state that the object is in, and sometimes there is an attribute, 
such as Order Status (pending, picking, packaged, shipped, received, and so on) that indicates 
the state. A state has a name in which each word is capitalized. The name should be unique and 
meaningful to the users. A state also has entry and exit actions, the things the object must do every 
time it enters or leaves a given state.
An event is something that happens at a specific time and place. Events cause a change of 
the object state, and it is said that a transition “fires.” States separate events, such as an order that 
is waiting to be filled, and events separate states, such as an Order Received event or an Order 
Complete event.
An event causes the transition and happens when a guard condition has been met. A guard 
condition is something that evaluates to either true or false and may be as simple as “Click to 
confirm order.” It also may be a condition that occurs in a method, such as an item that is out of 
stock. Guard conditions are shown in square brackets next to the event label.
There are also deferred events, or events that are held until an object changes to a state that 
can accept them. A user keying something in when a word processor is performing a timed backup 
is an example of a deferred event. After the timed backup has completed, the text appears in the 
document.
Events fall into three categories:
1. Signals or asynchronous messages, which occur when the calling program does not wait 
for a returning message, such as a feature run from a menu.
2. Synchronous messages, which are calls to functions or subroutines. The calling object 
stops and waits for control to be returned to it, along with an optional message.
3. Temporal events, which occur at a predetermined time. These usually do not involve an 
actor or any external event.
Material objects have persistence; that is, they exist for a long period of time. Airplane flights, 
concerts, and sporting events have shorter persistence (they may have states that transition in a 
shorter time). Some objects, called transient objects, do not survive the end of a session. These 
include main memory, Web URL (or location) data, web pages, CICS displays, and so on. The 
only way to save transient objects is to store information about them, such as storing Web data 
in a cookie.
Each time an object changes state, some of the attributes change their values. Furthermore, 
each time an object’s attributes change, there must be a method to change the attributes. Each 
of the methods needs a display or Web form to add or change the attributes. These become the 
interface objects. The display or Web form often has more controls (or fields) than just the attri-
butes that change. It would usually have primary keys, identifying information (such as a name or 
address), and other attributes that are needed for a good user interface. The exception is a temporal 
event, which may use database tables or a queue containing the information.


===== BOOK PAGE 309 =====

CHAPTER 10  •  OBJECT -ORIENTED SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN USING UML     309
A State Transition Example
Consider a student enrolling at a university and the various states they would go through. Three 
of the states are listed below in detail:
State: Potential Student
Event: Application Submitted
Method: new()
Attributes changed: Number
Name
Address
User interface: Student Application Web Form
State: Accepted Student
Event: Requirements Met
Method: acceptStudent()
Attributes changed: Admission Date
Student Status
Return Acceptance Letter
User interface: Accept Student Display
State: Dorm Assigned Student
Event: Dorm Selected
Method: assignDorm()
Attributes changed: Dorm Name
Dorm Room
Meal Plan
User interface: Assign Student Dorm Display
The other states are Program Student, Current Student, Continuing Student, and 
Graduated Student. Each state would have an event, methods, attributes changed, and a user 
interface associated with it. This series of states can be used to determine the attributes and meth-
ods that make up part of the class.
The states and events that trigger the changes may be represented on a statechart diagram 
(or a state transition diagram). The statechart diagram for Student is illustrated in Figure 10.22. 
States are represented by rectangles, and events or activities are the arrows that link the states and 
cause one state to change to another state. Transition events are named in the past tense because 
they have already occurred to create the transition.
Statechart diagrams are not created for all classes. They are created when:
1. A class has a complex life cycle.
2. An instance of a class may update its attributes in a number of ways throughout the life cycle.
3. A class has an operational life cycle.
4. Two classes depend on each other.
5. The object’s current behavior depends on what happened previously.
When you examine a statechart diagram, use the opportunity to look for errors and excep-
tions. Inspect the diagram to see whether events are happening at the wrong time. Also check 
that all events and states have been represented. Statechart diagrams have only two problems to 
avoid. Check to see that a state does not have all transitions going into the state or all transitions 
coming out of the state.
Each state should have at least one transition in and out of it. Some statechart diagrams use the 
same start and terminator symbols that an activity diagram uses: a filled-in circle to represent 
the start and concentric circles with the center filled in to signify the end of the diagram.
PACKAGES AND OTHER UML ARTIFACTS
Packages are containers for other UML things, such as use cases or classes. Packages can show sys-
tem partitioning, indicating which classes or use cases are grouped into a subsystem, called logical 
packages. They also may be component packages, which contain physical system components, or


===== BOOK PAGE 310 =====

310    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
use case packages, containing a group of use cases. Packages use a folder symbol with the pack-
age name either in the folder tab or centered in the folder. Packaging can occur during systems 
analysis, or later when the system is being designed. Packages also may have relationships, similar 
to class diagrams, that may include associations and inheritance.
Figure 10.23 is an example of a use case package diagram. It shows that four use cases, 
Add Student, Enroll in Class, Transfer Credits, and View Student Information, are part of 
the Student package. Three use cases, Add Faculty, View Faculty Information, and Assign 
Faculty to Course, are part of the Faculty package.
As you continue constructing diagrams, you will want to make use of component diagrams, 
deployment diagrams, and annotational things. These permit different perspectives on the work 
being accomplished.
A component diagram is similar to a class diagram, but it is more of a bird’s-eye view of the 
system architecture. The component diagram shows the components of the system, such as a class 
file, a package, shared libraries, a database, and so on, and how they are related to each other. The 
individual components in a component diagram are considered in more detail within other UML 
diagrams, such as class diagrams and use case diagrams.
A deployment diagram illustrates the physical implementation of the system, including the  
hardware, the relationships between the hardware, and the system on which it is deployed. 
The deployment diagram may show servers, workstations, printers, and so on.
Annotational things give developers more information about the system. These consist of 
notes that can be attached to anything in UML: objects, behaviors, relationships, diagrams, or any-
thing that requires detailed descriptions, assumptions, or any information relevant to the design and 
functionality of the system. The success of UML relies on the complete and accurate documentation 
of your system model to provide as much information as possible to the development team.  
FIGURE 10.22
A statechart diagram that shows 
how a student progresses from 
being a potential student to a 
graduated student.
Potential
Student
Accepted
Student
application
submitted
requirements
met
dorm
selected
student enrolled
in class
Dorm Assigned
Student
program
selected
Program
Student
graduation
requirements
complete
Current
Student
successful
course
completion
student
enrolled
in class
student
graduated
Graduated
Student
Continuing
Student


===== BOOK PAGE 311 =====

CHAPTER 10  •  OBJECT -ORIENTED SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN USING UML     311
Notes provide a source of common knowledge and understanding about your system to help put 
your developers on the same page. Notes are shown as a paper symbol with a bent corner and a 
line connecting them to the area that needs elaboration.
PUTTING UML TO WORK
UML provides a useful toolset for systems analysis and design. As with any other product created 
with the help of tools, the value of UML deliverables in a project depends on the expertise with 
which the systems analyst wields the tools. The analyst will initially use the UML toolset to break 
down the system requirements into a use case model and an object model. The use case model 
describes the use cases and actors. The object model describes the objects and object associations, 
and the responsibilities, collaborators, and attributes of the objects.
1. Define the use case model:
• Find the actors in the problem domain by reviewing the system requirements and inter -
viewing some business experts.
• Identify the major events initiated by the actors and develop a set of primary use cases at 
a very high level that describe the events from the perspective of each actor.
• Develop the use case diagrams to provide understanding of how the actors relate to the 
use cases that will define the system.
• Refine the primary use cases to develop a detailed description of system functionality for 
each primary use case. Provide additional details by developing the use case scenarios 
that document the alternate flows of the primary use cases.
• Review the use case scenarios with the business area experts to verify processes and 
interactions. Make modifications as necessary until the business area experts agree that 
the use case scenarios are complete and accurate.
FIGURE 10.23
Use cases can be grouped into 
packages.
Department
Faculty Member
Student
Financial Oﬃce
Registration
Student
Administration
View Faculty
Information
Add
Student
Transfer
Credits
Enroll
in Class
View Student
Information
Add
Faculty
Assign Faculty
to Course
Student
Faculty


===== BOOK PAGE 312 =====

312    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
2. Continue UML diagramming to model the system during the systems analysis phase:
• Derive activity diagrams from use case diagrams.
• Develop sequence and communication diagrams from use case scenarios.
• Review the sequence diagrams with the business area experts to verify processes and 
interactions. Make modifications as necessary until the business area experts agree that 
the sequence diagrams are complete and accurate. This additional review of the graphical 
sequence diagrams often provides the business area experts with an opportunity to rethink 
and refine processes in more atomic detail than the review of the use case scenarios.
canceled when the patron checks out the book or journal or 
through a formal canceling service.
As Dewey looks up from the report, she says to Peri, “I’m 
beginning to understand the patron (or user) requirements. I see 
lots of similarities between my old university library and yours. 
One item I didn’t see covered, though, was how you decide what the 
library should collect and what it should get rid of.”
Peri chuckles and replies, “That’s an insightful question. The 
library staff handles the purchase of new books and journals for 
the library. If something is popular, more than two copies are pur -
chased. We can create, update, and delete information about titles 
and copies of books and journals, patrons, loan of materials, and 
reservations in the system.”
Dewey looks up from her notepad and says, “I’m still a little 
confused. What’s the difference between the terms title and copy?”
Peri responds, “The library can have several copies of a title. 
Title normally refers to the name of a book or journal. Copies of a 
title are actually lent out from the library.”
Based on Dewey’s interview with Peri and the requirements 
description in Peri’s report, as well as your own experience using 
library services, use UML to answer the following questions. (Note: 
It is important to make sure your solutions are logical and workable. 
State your assumptions clearly whenever necessary.)
1. Draw a use case diagram to represent actors and use cases in 
the system.
2. For each use case, describe the steps (as we did to organize 
the use cases).
3. Describe scenarios for the steps. In other words, create a 
patron and write up an example of the patron as they go 
through each step.
4. Develop a list of things.
5. Create sequence diagrams for use cases based on steps and 
scenarios.
6. Complete the class diagram by determining relationships 
between classes and defining the attributes and methods of 
each class. Use the grouping thing called package to simplify 
the class diagram.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 10.3 
Developing a Fine System That Was Long Overdue: Using  
Object-Oriented Analysis for the Ruminski Public Library System*
As Dewey Dezmal enters the high-ceilinged, wood-paneled 
reading room of the Ruminski Public Library, a young woman, 
seated at a long, oak table, pokes her head out from behind a 
computer screen, sees her, and stands, saying, “Welcome. I’m Peri 
Otticle, the director of the library. I understand you are here to help 
us develop our new information system.”
Still in awe of the beauty of the old library building and the 
juxtaposition of so much technology amid so much history, Dewey 
introduces herself as a systems analyst with a small IT consulting 
firm, People and Objects, Inc.
“It’s the first time I’ve been assigned to this type of project, 
although it’s actually interesting for me, because my degree is from 
the Information Studies School at Upstate University. You can major 
in library science or IT there, so lots of my classmates went on to 
work in public libraries. I opted for the IT degree.”
“We should work well together, then,” Peri says. “Let’s go to my 
office so we don’t disturb any patrons, and I can talk you through 
a report I wrote.”
As they pass the beautiful, winding staircase seemingly sculpted 
in wood, Peri notices Dewey looking at the surroundings and says, 
“You may wonder about the grandeur of the building, because we 
are a public institution. We are fortunate. Our benefactor is Valerian 
Ruminski. In fact, he has donated so much money to so many librar-
ies that the staff affectionately calls him ‘Valerian the Librarian.’”
As they pass several patrons, Peri continues, “As you can see, 
it’s a very busy place. Even though we also have many online read-
ers who just browse materials online. And, regardless of our old 
surroundings, we don’t dwell in the past.”
Dewey reads the report Peri has handed her. One large section is 
titled “Summary of Patrons’ Main Requirements,” and the bulleted 
list states:
 • A library patron who is registered in the system can borrow 
books and magazines from the system.
 • The library system should periodically check (at least once per 
week) whether a copy of a book or journal borrowed by a patron 
has become overdue. If so, a notice will be sent to the patron.
 • A patron can reserve a book or journal that has been lent out 
or is in the process of purchase. The reservation should be 
* Based on a problem by Dr. Wayne Huang.


===== BOOK PAGE 313 =====

CHAPTER 10  •  OBJECT -ORIENTED SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN USING UML     313
3. Develop the class diagrams:
• Look for nouns in use cases and list them. They are potential objects. Once you identify 
the objects, look for similarities and differences in the objects due to the objects’ states or 
behavior, and then create classes.
• Define the major relationships between the classes. Look for “has a” and “is a” relation-
ships between classes.
• Examine use case and sequence diagrams to determine classes.
• Beginning with the use cases that are the most important to the system design, create class 
diagrams that show the classes and relationships that exist in the use cases. One class dia-
gram may represent the classes and relationships described in several related use cases.
4. Draw statechart diagrams:
• Develop statechart diagrams for certain class diagrams to provide further analysis of the 
system at this point. Use statechart diagrams to aid in understanding complex processes 
that cannot be fully derived by the sequence diagrams.
• Determine methods by examining statechart diagrams. Derive state (data) class attributes 
from use cases, business area experts, and class methods. Indicate whether the methods 
and attributes of the class are public (accessible externally) or private (internal to the 
class). The statechart diagrams are extremely useful in modifying class diagrams.
5. Begin systems design by refining UML diagrams and using them to derive classes and their 
attributes and methods:
• Review all existing UML diagrams for the system. Write class specifications for each 
class that include the class attributes, methods, and their descriptions. Review sequence 
diagrams to identify other class methods.
• Develop methods specifications that detail the input and output requirements for the 
method, along with a detailed description of the internal processing of the method.
• Create another set of sequence diagrams (if necessary) to reflect the actual class methods 
and interactions with each other and the system interfaces.
• Create class diagrams, using the specialized class symbols for boundary or interface 
class, entity class, and control class.
• Analyze the class diagrams to derive the system components, that is, functionally and 
logically related classes that will be compiled and deployed together as a .DLL, a .COM 
object, a Java Bean, a package, and so forth.
• Develop deployment diagrams to indicate how your system components will be deployed 
in the production environment.
6. Document your system design in detail. This step is critical. The more complete the infor-
mation you provide the development team through documentation and UML diagrams, the 
faster the development and the more solid the final production system.
THE IMPORTANCE OF USING UML FOR MODELING
UML is a powerful tool that can greatly improve the quality of your systems analysis and design, 
and it is hoped that the improved practices will translate into higher-quality systems.
By using UML iteratively in analysis and design, you can achieve a greater understanding 
between the business team and the IT team regarding the system requirements and the processes 
that need to occur in the system to meet those requirements.
The first iteration of analysis should be at a very high level, to identify the overall system 
objectives and validate the requirements through use case analysis. Identifying the actors and 
defining the initial use case model are part of this first iteration. Subsequent iterations of analy-
sis further refine the system requirements through the development of use case scenarios, class 
diagrams, sequence diagrams, statechart diagrams, and so on. Each iteration takes a successively 
more detailed look at the design of the system until the things and relationships in the system are 
clearly and precisely defined in UML documents.
When your analysis and design are complete, you should have an accurate and detailed set of 
specifications for the classes, scenarios, activities, and sequencing in the system. In general, you


===== BOOK PAGE 314 =====

314    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
can relate the thoroughness of the analysis and design of a system to the amount of time required 
to develop the system and the resultant quality of the delivered product.
Often overlooked in the development of a new system is that the further a project progresses, 
the costlier the changes are to the business requirements of a system. Changing the design of a 
system using a computer-aided software engineering tool, or even on paper, during the analysis 
and design phases of a project is easier, faster, and much less expensive than doing so during the 
development phase of the project.
Unfortunately, some employers are shortsighted, believing that only when a programmer or 
analyst is coding is that employee actually working. Some employers erroneously assume that 
programmer productivity can be judged solely by the amount of code produced, without recogniz-
ing that diagramming ultimately saves time and money that might otherwise be wasted if a project 
is prototyped without proper planning.
An analogy to building a house is very apt in this situation. You do not want to live in a 
structure built without planning, one in which rooms and features are randomly added without 
regard to function or cost. You want a builder to build your agreed-upon design from blueprints 
containing specifications that have been carefully reviewed by everyone concerned. As a member 
of an analyst team so accurately observed, “Putting a project on paper before coding will wind 
up costing less in the long run. It’s much cheaper to erase a diagram than it is to change coding.”
When business requirements change during the analysis phase, you may have to redraw some 
UML diagrams. If the business requirements change during the development phase, however, a 
substantial amount of time and expense may be required to redesign, recode, and retest the system. 
By confirming your analysis and design on paper (especially through the use of UML diagrams) 
with users who are business area experts, you help to ensure that correct business requirements 
will be met when the system is completed.
have actually been making small changes in the CSR user inter -
face for the past eight months anyway. The CSR users have been 
calling us directly and begging for help. They usually want just a 
small change to one isolated part of the system, but that has cre-
ated a high labor drain because we must recertify the entire system. 
You know how the effects of a small change can ripple through 
a large program. We’ve billed the time to program maintenance 
on the grounds that we thought we were just fine-tuning the com-
pleted system. Although the changes have been gradual, in eight 
months we’ve pretty much rewritten about a quarter of the CSR 
user interface code already. The work has not been falling off. It’s 
still pretty steady.”
“So, what you’re telling me,” says Bradley, “is that we have 
system needs in this area that have been changing constantly while 
we tried to write specifications, tried to write program code, and 
tried to make a fixed solution work against a fluid problem. How 
can we afford to write programs if they will only last a few months?”
How can Bradley manage a systems development process that 
no longer has fixed or constant business processes as part of its goal 
set? Is there a way for Rachael to manage specification and control 
maintenance costs when programmers are constantly asked to tin -
ker with isolated parts of a large program? Write two paragraphs to 
answer these questions. Keep in mind that an important goal is to 
provide good support for the users’ needs and the organization’s busi-
ness strategies.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 10.4 
C-Shore++
“They want the core of the customer service representative’s 
user interface to be radically reprogrammed again!” says Bradley 
Vargo, the information systems development director at C-Shore 
Mutual Funds, based in Burton, Michigan. “Only eight months 
ago, we completed a two-year development project of the CSR 
[Customer Service Representative] system. During that entire proj-
ect, we endured a parade of moving requirements. Every month, 
Chelsea and Jonathan from Marketing would invent some com-
petitive new customer service feature, and within a week, the CSR 
group would be down here with vast changes to the CSR system 
specifications. I thought we’d never finish that project! Now it looks 
as if we will have to start a new reprogramming project on a system 
less than a year old. We had forecast this system for a seven-year 
lifespan! Now I think it may be going into eternal reconstruction.”
Bradley is talking with Rachael Ciupek, the senior applica-
tion systems analyst responsible for the CSR system, and Bridget 
Ciupek, her sister and the programmer who wrote most of the user 
interface. “Calm down, Bradley,” says Rachael. “It is not the fault of 
the people in Marketing or CSR. The nature of our business has been 
affected by fast-paced competition. Marketing doesn’t invent these 
changes out of boredom. They are often responding to new, web-
based customer services offered by our competition. We have to 
stay ahead or at least keep up, or we’ll all be looking for new jobs.”
“Bradley, Rachael, I think you better know that the situation 
may be worse than you think,” Bridget chips in. “The programmers


===== BOOK PAGE 315 =====

CHAPTER 10  •  OBJECT -ORIENTED SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN USING UML     315
Summary
Object-oriented systems describe entities as objects. Objects are part of a general concept called classes, the 
main unit of analysis in object-oriented analysis and design. When the object-oriented approach was first 
introduced, advocates cited reusability of the objects as the main benefit of the approach. Although reusability 
is the main goal, maintaining systems is also very important.
Analysts can use CRC cards to begin the process of object modeling in an informal way. Object 
Think can be added to the CRC cards to assist the analyst in refining responsibilities into smaller and 
smaller tasks. CRC sessions can be held with a group of analysts to determine classes and responsibilities 
interactively.
Unified modeling language (UML) provides a standardized set of tools to document the analysis and 
design of a software system. UML is fundamentally based on an object-oriented technique known as use 
case modeling. A use case model describes what a system does without describing how the system does 
it. A use case model partitions system functionality into behaviors (called use cases) that are significant to 
the users of the system (called actors). Different scenarios are created for each different set of conditions 
of a use case.
The main components of UML are things, relationships, and diagrams. Diagrams are related to one 
another. Structural things are most common; they include classes, interfaces, use cases, and many other 
elements that provide a way to create models. Structural things allow the user to describe relationships. 
Behavioral things describe how things work. Group things are used to define boundaries. Annotational things 
permit the analyst to add notes to the diagrams.
Relationships are the glue that holds the things together. Structural relationships are used to tie the 
things together in structural diagrams. Structural relationships include dependencies, aggregations, asso-
ciations, and generalizations. Behavioral diagrams use the four basic types of behavioral relationships: 
communicates, includes, extends, and generalizes.
The toolset of UML is composed of UML diagrams. They include use case diagrams, activity diagrams, 
sequence diagrams, communication diagrams, class diagrams, and statechart diagrams. In addition to using 
the diagrams, analysts can describe a use case by writing a use case scenario.
Using UML iteratively in analysis and design allows for greater understanding between a business team 
and an IT team regarding the system requirements and the processes that need to occur in a system to meet 
those requirements.
Keywords and Phrases
abstract class
activity diagram
actor
aggregation
Ajax
annotational thing
association
asynchronous message
boundary class
branch
class
class diagram
communication diagram
control class
CRC cards
dependencies
deployment diagram
entity class
event
fork
generalization/specialization (gen/spec) diagram
inheritance
join
main path
merge
message
method overloading
method overriding
object
object-oriented
package
polymorphism
primary use case
relationship
sequence diagram
state
statechart diagram
swimlane
synchronization bar
synchronous message
temporal event
unified modeling language (UML)
use case diagram
use case scenario
whole/part relationship


===== BOOK PAGE 316 =====

316    PART III  •  THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
Review Questions
1. List two reasons for taking an object-oriented approach to systems development.
2. Describe the difference between a class and an object.
3. Explain the concept of inheritance in object-oriented systems.
4. What does CRC stand for?
5. Describe what Object Think adds to the CRC card.
6. What is UML?
7. What are the three major elements of UML?
8. List what the concept of structural things includes.
9. List what the concept of behavioral things includes.
10. What are the two main types of diagrams in UML?
11. List the diagrams included in a structural diagram.
12. List the diagrams included in a behavioral diagram.
13. What does a use case model describe?
14. Would you describe a use case model as a logical or a physical model of a system? Defend your 
answer in a paragraph.
15. Define what an actor is in a use case diagram.
16. What three things must a use case always describe?
17. What does an activity diagram depict?
18. Write a paragraph that describes the use of swimlanes on activity diagrams.
19. What can be depicted on a sequence or communication diagram?
20. Why is defining classes such an important object-oriented analysis task?
21. What can be shown on a class diagram?
22. Define method overloading.
23. List the four categories into which classes fall.
24. What are the steps in creating a sequence diagram?
25. What are the two categories of relationships between classes?
26. How are gen/spec diagrams used?
27. What is another term for polymorphism?
28. What does a statechart diagram depict?
29. What is a package in the UML approach?
30. Why is using UML for modeling important?
Problems
1. Create a series of CRC cards for the World’s Trend Catalog Division (note that their business 
activities are listed in Consulting Opportunity 10.1 earlier in this chapter). Once an order is placed, 
the order fulfillment crew takes over and checks for availability, fills the order, and calculates the 
total amount of the order. Use five CRC cards, one for each of the following classes: order, order 
fulfillment, inventory, product, and customer. Complete the section on classes, responsibilities, and 
collaborators.
2. Finish the CRC cards in Problem 1 by creating Object Think statements and property names for each 
of the five classes.
3. Draw a use case diagram for the World’s Trend Catalog Division.
4. Draw four pictures, showing examples of four types of behavioral relationships for Joel Porter’s 
BMW automobile dealership. What type of relationship is involved when a customer must arrange 
financing? Are there common activities involved when a person either leases or buys an automobile? 
What type of relationship is between an employee who is a manager or one who is a salesperson?
5. Draw a communication diagram for a student taking a course from a teacher who is part of the 
faculty.
6. Coleman County has a phone exchange that handles calls between callers and those receiving the 
call. Given these three actors, draw a simple sequence diagram for making a simple phone call.
7. You are ready to begin UML modeling for the Aldo Sohm Clinic. Draw a class diagram that includes 
a physician, a patient, an appointment, and a patient’s bill. Do not get the insurance company 
involved.
8. Use UML to draw examples of the four structural relationships for the Aldo Sohm Clinic.
9. Write a sample use case scenario for a patient who sees a physician in the Aldo Sohm Clinic.


===== BOOK PAGE 317 =====

CHAPTER 10  •  OBJECT -ORIENTED SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN USING UML     317
10. Adaku’s Supermarket, a small chain of grocery stores, is building a website to allow customers 
to place online orders for groceries and other items. The customer places a web order, the cus-
tomer master is updated, and an order record is created. The order prints at a local store, and store 
employees pick the goods from the shelves. The customer is then sent an email notification that their 
order is ready. When the customer picks up the order, frozen goods, chilled products, and other items 
are assembled. Draw an activity diagram showing the customer using the website to place an order, 
verification of the order, order confirmation, order details sent to the local store, and a customer email 
sent to the customer.
11. Sludge’s Auto (refer to Chapter 12) is as an auto parts recycling center that is using Ajax on websites 
for customers to browse for parts. Ajax allows the website to obtain data from the server while the 
user stays on the original web page. The customer needs to know the make, model, and year of a car 
as well as the part. If the part is in stock, the description, condition of the part, price, and shipping 
cost are displayed, with the quantity available for each condition of the part, along with a picture 
of the part. Draw a sequence diagram using boundary, control, and entity classes for the Auto Part 
Query for Sludge’s Auto.
12. Musixscore.com is an online service providing vocal or instrumental sheet music to customers who 
like to sing or play instruments. On the “Browse Music” web page, customers select a genre of music 
from a drop-down list. The web page uses Ajax to obtain a list of performers, musicians, or groups 
that match the genre, which is formatted as a drop-down list. When a selection is made from the 
performer’s drop-down list, the web page uses Ajax to display a third drop-down list displaying all 
the CDs or other works of the performer. When a CD is selected, the web page uses Ajax to obtain 
all the songs on the CD in a fourth drop-down list. The viewer may make multiple selections. When 
the Add to Shopping Cart image is clicked, the songs are added to the shopping cart. The viewer may 
change any of the drop-down lists to select additional sheet music, and the process is repeated.
a. Write a use case description for the Browse Music Score use case, representing this activity.
b. Draw a sequence diagram using boundary, control, and entity classes for the Musixscore web 
page.
c. Write a list of the messages, names, and the parameters, along with the data types, that would be 
passed to the classes and the values (with data types) that are included with the return message. 
Make any assumptions you need to make about the data.
d. Create a class diagram for the entity classes used in the sequence diagram.
Selected Bibliography
Beck, K., & Cunningham, W. (1989). A laboratory for teaching object-oriented thinking. http://c2.com/
doc/oopsla89/paper.html
Bellin, D., & Suchman Simone, S. (1997). The CRC card book. Addison-Wesley Professional.
Booch, G., Jacobson, I., & Rumbaugh, J. (2005). The unified modeling language user guide (2nd ed.). 
Addison-Wesley Professional.
Bouslama, M., & Abdi, M. K. (2021). Towards a formal approach for assessing the design quality of 
object-oriented systems. International Journal of Open Source Sofware and Processes, 12(3), 1–16.
Cockburn, A. (2001). Writing effective use cases. Addison-Wesley.
Dobing, B., & Parsons, J. (2006). How UML is used. Communications of the ACM, 49(5), 109–113.
Fowler, M. (2003). UML distilled: A brief guide to the standard object modeling language (3rd ed.). 
Addison-Wesley Professional.
Kulak, D., & Guiney, E. (2004). Use cases: Requirements in context (2nd ed.). Addison-Wesley 
Professional.
Miles, R., & Hamilton, K. (2006). Learning UML 2.0. O’Reilly Media.
Sahraoudi, A. E. K., & Blum, T. (2003). Using object-oriented methods in a system lifecycle process 
model. ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering Notes, 28(2).


===== BOOK PAGE 318 =====

This page intentionally left blank


===== BOOK PAGE 319 =====

David Sipress/The New Yorker Collection/The Cartoon Bank
The Essentials of Design
PART  
IV


===== BOOK PAGE 320 =====

320
Designing Effective Output
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Once you have mastered the material in this chapter, you will be able to:
1 Appreciate the objectives for effective output design.
2 Relate output content to output methods inside and outside the organization.
3 Realize how output bias affects users.
4 Learn how to design printed output.
5 Discover how to design display output.
6 Gain an understanding about data visualization.
7 Learn how to design a website.
8 Appreciate and adopt Web 2.0 technologies.
9 Discover how to design output and content for social media.
10 Realize the complexities of designing apps for smartphones and tablets.
11 Gain knowledge regarding output production and XML.
Output is information delivered to users through an information system by way of intranets, 
extranets, or the web. Some data require extensive processing before they become 
suitable output; other stored data are retrieved and considered output with little or no 
processing. Output can take many forms, including soft copy such as display screens, 
smartphones, tablets, video and audio output, and social media output and content, as well 
as the traditional hard copy of printed reports. Responsive web design means designing 
a website that can be viewed on a desktop, tablet, or smartphone. Web design has moved 
away from 3-D, realistic images with shadows (skeuomorphic design) to flat web design 
(two-dimensional images without shadowing). Analysts can use data visualization to create 
effective output. Users rely on output to accomplish their tasks, and they often judge the 
merit of a system solely by its output. To create the most useful output possible, a systems 
analyst must work closely with users through an interactive process until the result is 
satisfactory.
11
CHAPTER

