
===== BOOK PAGE 321 =====

CHAPTER 11  •  DEsigning EffECTivE  OuTPuT     321
so those with low vision could read what would be difficult or 
impossible to read on conventional printed output. In order to build 
his braille printer, he relied on the help of many different parties. 
There is an abundance of computer output that is more accessible 
to those with disabilities. After you view the video, please reflect 
on the following questions:
1. What other types of output are there that could help people 
with low vision?
2. How can a systems analyst design output so that it is usable 
for those who are color blind?
3. What type of output would you recommend for someone who 
is hard of hearing? What type of output would you eliminate 
or downplay for someone who is hard of hearing?
4. Consider how designing with the goal of improving the 
quality of output can improve systems for everyone, 
including those with disabilities.
SYSTEMS SCENARIO  
Designing Output to Include Disabled People
In this chapter we learn that output is not limited to information 
shown on computer displays and printouts. In today’s video, we 
learn about a young inventor who created and built a braille printer 
OUTPUT DESIGN OBJECTIVES
It is essential for ouput design to be useful to ensure the use and acceptance of the information 
system. A systems analyst focuses on six objectives when designing output:
1. Designing output to serve the intended purpose
2. Designing output to fit the user
3. Delivering the appropriate quantity of output
4. Making sure the output is where it is needed
5. Providing the output on time
6. Choosing the right output method
Designing Output to Serve the Intended Purpose
All output should have a purpose. During the information requirements phase of analysis, a 
systems analyst determines user and organization purposes. Output is then designed based on 
those purposes.
An application permits numerous opportunities to supply output, but the systems analyst 
focuses on features tied to the purposes defined during analysis. If the output is not functional, 
it should not be created because there are costs of time and materials associated with all output 
from a system.
Designing Output to Fit the User
With a large information system serving many users for many different purposes, it is often 
difficult to personalize output. Based on interviews, observations, cost considerations, and perhaps 
prototypes, it will be possible to design output that addresses what many, if not all, users need 
and prefer.
It is most practical to create user-specific or user-customizable output when designing for 
a decision support system (DSS) or other highly interactive applications such as those using the 
web as a platform. It is still possible, however, to design output to fit a user’s tasks and function 
in the organization, which leads us to the next objective.
To view the video for this scenario,  
see eText Chapter 11.
Bloomberg/Boclips


===== BOOK PAGE 322 =====

322    PART iv •  THE EssEnTiALs  Of  DEsign
Delivering the Appropriate Quantity of Output
Part of the task of designing output is deciding what quantity of output is correct for users.  
A useful heuristic is that a system must provide what each person needs to complete their work. 
This answer is still far from a total solution because it may be appropriate to display a subset of 
that information at first and then provide a way for the user to access additional information easily.
The problem of information overload is so prevalent that it is a cliché, but it remains a valid 
concern. No one is served if excess information is provided only to flaunt the capabilities of the 
system. Always keep the decision makers in mind. Often the amounts of output users need is 
limited, especially if there is an easy way to access more via a hyperlink or drill-down capability.
Making Sure the Output Is Where It Is Needed
Output is often produced at one location and then distributed to the user. The increase in online, 
screen-displayed output that is personally accessible has cut down somewhat on the problem of 
distribution, but appropriate distribution is still an important objective for a systems analyst. To be 
used and useful, output must be presented to the right user. No matter how well designed reports 
are, if the pertinent decision makers do not see them, they have no value.
Providing Output on Time
One common complaint of users is that they do not receive information in time to make necessary 
decisions. Although timing isn’t everything, it does play a large part in the usefulness of output. 
Many reports are required daily, some only monthly, others annually, and others only by exception. 
Using well-publicized, web-based output can alleviate some problems with the timing of output 
distribution as well. Accurate timing of output can be critical to business operations.
Choosing the Right Output Method
Choosing the right output method for each user is another objective in designing output. Much 
output now appears on screens, and users have the option of printing it out with their own printer. 
An analyst needs to recognize the trade-offs involved in choosing an output method. Costs differ; 
for the user, there are also differences in the accessibility, flexibility, durability, distribution, 
storage and retrieval possibilities, transportability, and overall impact of the data. The choice of 
output methods is not trivial, nor is it usually a foregone conclusion.
RELATING OUTPUT CONTENT TO OUTPUT METHOD
The content of output from information systems is interrelated with the output method. When 
designing output, systems analysts must consider how function influences form and how the 
intended purpose will influence the output method chosen.
Output should be thought of in a general way so that any information generated by the 
computer system that is useful to people in some way can be considered output. It is possible 
to conceptualize output as either external (going outside the business), such as information that 
appears to the public on the web, or internal (staying within the business), such as material avail-
able on an intranet.
External output differs from internal output in its distribution, design, and appearance. Many 
external documents must include instructions to the recipient if they are to be used correctly. 
Many external outputs are placed on preprinted forms or websites bearing the company logo and 
corporate colors.
With the advent of green IT (also called green computing or ICT sustainability), many 
organizations are trying to encourage customers to think about environmental savings, ease of 
use, and 24-hour access to accounts so that they switch from paper statements to online bills. 
Electronic transactions lessen the environmental impact of paper output and further computerize 
the business-to-consumer relationship.
Internal outputs range from short summary reports to lengthy, detailed reports. Other kinds of 
internal reports include historical reports and exception reports that are output only at the time an 
exception occurs. Examples of exception reports are a listing of all employees with no absences 
for the year, a listing of all salespeople who did not meet their monthly sales quota, or a report on 
consumer complaints made in the past six months.


===== BOOK PAGE 323 =====

CHAPTER 11  •  DEsigning EffECTivE  OuTPuT     323
FIGURE 11.1
A comparison of output methods.
Display screen • Interactive • May require cabling and setup space
• Online, real-time transmission  • Requires system for taking “snapshots” of
screen and storing them for future use • Quiet
• Takes advantage of computer capabilities
for movement within databases and ﬁles
• Good for frequently accessed, ephemeral
messages
Audio output
and podcasts
• Good for individual user
• Good for transient messages 
• Needs earbuds where output will interfere 
• Good where worker needs hands free  
with other tasks
• Good if output needs to be 
widely distributed
• Has limited application
Mobile devices • Highly portable • Screen may be too small for text
• Icons and buttons may be confusing
• May be lost more easily
• Very interactive using gestures
• Zoom and magniﬁcation are possible
Electronic output • Reduces paper
(email, websites,
blogs, and RSS
feeds)
• Can be updated very easily
• Is not conducive to formatting (email)
• Is diﬃcult to convey context of messages (email)
•
•
Can be “broadcast” • Websites need diligent maintenance
Can be made interactive
Output Method Advantages Disadvantages
Printer • Aﬀordable for most organizations • Still requires some operator intervention
• Flexible in types of output, location, • Compatibility problems with computer software
and capabilities • May require special, expensive supplies
• Handles large volumes of output     • Depending on model, may be slow
• Environmentally unfriendly• Highly reliable with little down time
Output Technologies
Producing different types of output requires different technologies. For printed output, the options 
include a variety of printers, including standard document printers, specialized label printers, and 
3-D printers. For screen output, the options include attached or stand-alone displays as well as touch-
sensitive screens found on smartphones and tablets. Audio output can be amplified over a loudspeaker 
or designed for individual listening on mobile devices. Electronic output includes web pages, email, 
RSS (Real Simple Syndication) feeds, and blogs. Figure 11.1 compares output methods.
Factors to Consider When Choosing Output Technology
There are several factors to consider when choosing output technology. Although the technology 
changes rapidly, certain usage factors remain fairly constant in relation to technological break-
throughs. These factors, some of which present trade-offs, must be considered:
1. Who will use (see) the output (requisite quality)?
2. How many people need the output?
3. Where is the output needed (distribution, logistics)?
4. What is the purpose of the output? What user and organization tasks are supported?
5. What is the speed with which output is needed?
6. How frequently will the output be accessed?
7. How long will (or must) the output be stored?
8. Under what special regulations is the output produced, stored, and distributed?
9. What are the initial and ongoing costs of maintenance and supplies?
10. What are the human and environmental requirements (accessibility, noise absorption, 
controlled temperature, space for equipment, cabling, and proximity to Wi-Fi transmitters 
or access points—that is, hot spots) for output technologies?


===== BOOK PAGE 324 =====

324    PART iv •  THE EssEnTiALs  Of  DEsign
Increasingly, organizations are taking up green IT initiatives as part of sustainability efforts. 
These initiatives may limit the quantity of paper reports that are printed or may discourage employees 
from printing out copies of email messages by adding a green IT notification to the bottom of each 
corporate email message. By examining each output factor separately, the analyst can determine the 
interrelationships and how they may be traded off for one another in a particular system.
Who Will Use (See) the Output? Discovering who will use the output is important because job 
requirements help dictate what output method is appropriate. For example, when district managers 
must be away from their desks for extended periods, they need printed output that can travel with 
them or technology that can access appropriate websites and databases as they visit the managers 
in their region. Screen output or interactive web documents are excellent for people such as truck 
dispatchers who are deskbound for long periods.
External recipients of output (clients and customers, vendors and suppliers, shareholders, 
and regulatory agencies) and users within the business require different output. Clients, vendors, 
and suppliers can be part of several extranets, which are networks of computers built by the 
organization that provide applications, processing, and information to users on the network.
Examine the website shown in Figure 11.2 for an ecommerce company called Merchants 
Bay. The web designer is attuned to the intended users of the wholesale gift site. The ecommerce 
company’s website is powered by a patented negotiating algorithm in which users submit bids (for 
one item or 400) on an array of merchandise. The company’s strategy is based on the president’s 
personal experience with flea markets and the observation that people are powerfully attracted 
to bargaining for a deal.
The website intentionally invokes a cluttered feel, similar to what one gets walking through 
a flea market. The site is intended for customers who would frequent flea markets in person: 
they are known to be collectors, gregarious and curious by nature. The website has a profusion 
of colors, includes a variety of sale signs in a mixture of lettering, and even incorporates a video 
that provides new layers of color and action. Colloquial language is used throughout the site.
The web designer has carried out a nautical metaphor throughout the site. The user is invited 
to “Search the Bay” for merchandise. In addition, the company’s logo includes a wave and a sun 
on the horizon, and an icon of a ship’s steering wheel is placed above a column that invites the 
user to “navigate” for products, services, and customer service.
To complete a transaction on the site, a customer has an opportunity to accept the “Captain’s 
price” as posted or to submit a bid. If the bid submitted is too low according to the stored negotiation 
algorithm, a natural language response is returned in a pop-up window stating: “Thanks for your 
offer, mate. You don’t like to part with your money if you don’t have to, heh? Yet hey, I like ya, mate.  
FIGURE 11.2
When designing a website, it is 
important to choose a metaphor 
that can be used throughout the 
site. This example from Merchants 
Bay (www.merchantsbay.com)  
employs a nautical theme. 
(Screenshot of Merchants Bay 
website. Copyright © 2000 by 
Merchants Bay LLC. Reprinted 
with permission of Troy Pappas.)


===== BOOK PAGE 325 =====

CHAPTER 11  •  DEsigning EffECTivE  OuTPuT     325
Please try again by offering a better price or by ordering a larger quantity.” In this way, the bid  
is rejected in a friendly, humorous way, and bidders are even given two hints on how to improve 
the chances that their next bids will be successful. The web designer clearly had a solid profile 
of the intended customer in mind when designing the site.
How Many People Need the Output? Choice of output technology is also influenced by how many 
users need the output. If many people need output, web-based documents with a print option or 
printed copies are probably justified. Some external customers may want a printed copy of specific 
documents, such as a stockholder report or a monthly billing statement, but others may prefer 
web-based documents with an email notification. If only one user needs the output, a screen or 
audio may be more suitable.
Where Is the Output Needed (Distribution, Logistics)? The choice of output technology is influ-
enced by the physical destination of the output. Information that will remain close to its point of 
origin, that will be used by only a few users in the business, and that may be stored or referred 
into, before I’m ready to decide whether the loan of the lesser pan-
das is a good idea. Where are the data on the animals we’re consid-
ering?” says Rex.
Annie replies, “We have to go to Ella’s office to access the 
database. Mostly, the other employees who need to know just use 
her computer.”
Mona gets into the swing of the discussion and says, “Some 
information on the current state of the budget would be divine 
too. I’ll go bananas with new expenditures until we at least have a 
summary of what we’re spending. I bet it’s a bunch.”
Ty answers, “We don’t mean to monkey around, but frankly we 
feel trapped. Costs of reproducing all the financial data seem high to 
us. We’d rather put our money into reproducing rare and endangered 
species! Paperwork multiplies on its own.”
The group laughs nervously together, but there is an air of 
expectancy in the room. The consensus is that the committee mem-
bers need more internal information about the zoo’s financial status 
and the prospective loan animals.
Ella, aware that the group cannot be tamed in the way the 
previous one was, says, “The old committee preferred to get their 
information informally, through chatting with us. Let’s spend this 
first meeting discovering what kinds of information you think you 
need to do your work as a committee. Financial data are stored on 
a laptop that our financial director uses. It’s his baby, of course.”
What are some of the problems related to output that the com-
mittee is experiencing? What suggestions do you have for improv-
ing output to the committee? How can the budget constraints of the 
zoo be met while still allowing the committee to receive the output 
it needs to function? Comment on the adequacy of the output tech-
nology that is currently in use at the zoo. Suggest alternatives or 
modifications to output and output technology that would enhance 
what is being done. (Hint: Consider ways in which the committee 
can leverage its use of the web to get the output that it needs and 
that it needs to share.) Analyze both internal and external output 
requirements.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 11.1 
Your Habitat or Mine?
“Why can’t they get this right? It’s driving me to distrac-
tion. The nature conservancy in Colombia is writing to me about a 
tiger that has been on loan from our place for over two years. They 
should be writing to Tulsa,” trumpets Ella Fant, waving a letter in 
the air. Ella is general curator in charge of the animal breeding pro-
gram at the nonprofit Gotham Zoo which fights against extinction 
through the reintroduction of species, conservation breeding, and 
research and technology development all aimed at conservation.1
Ella is talking with members of the zoo’s five-person committee 
about the proposals before them. The committee meets every month 
to decide which animals to loan to other zoos and which animals 
to get on loan for breeding. The committee is composed of Ella; Ty 
Garr, the zoo’s director; two zoo employees, Annie Malle and Mona 
Key; and a layperson, Rex Lyon, who is a member of the business 
community.
Ty paces in front of the group and continues the meeting, 
saying, “We have the possibility of loaning out two of our golden 
tamarins, and we can play matchmaker for two lesser pandas. 
Because three of you are new to the committee, I’ll briefly discuss 
your responsibilities. As you know, Ella and I would pounce on any 
chance to lure animals in for the breeding program. Your duties 
are to assess the zoo’s financial resources and to look at our zoo’s 
immediate demands. You also must consider the season and our 
shipping capability, as well as that of the zoos we’re considering. 
The other zoos charge us nothing for the loan of their animals for the 
breeding program. We pay the shipping for any animal being loaned 
to us and then maintain them, and that gets expensive.”
“There is a special database on the web that we subscribe to 
that includes selected species with 164 other zoos,” says Ella as she 
picks up the story from Ty. “I have the password for the database 
stored on my computer. I can access the records of all captive 
animals in the system, including those from the two zoos we are 
negotiating with right now.”
As the committee members work, they begin asking questions. 
“I need to read some information, get some meat to sink my teeth 
1 Stated goals are based on the website for the nonprofit Woodland Park Zoo, https://www.zoo.org/ssp.


===== BOOK PAGE 326 =====

326    PART iv •  THE EssEnTiALs  Of  DEsign
to frequently can safely be printed or mounted on an intranet. An abundance of information that 
must be transmitted to users at great distances in branch operations may be better distributed 
electronically, via the web or extranets, with the recipient customizing it.
Sometimes federal or state regulations dictate that a printed form remain on file at a particular 
location for a specified period. In those instances, it is the responsibility of the systems analyst to 
see that the regulation is observed for any output that is designed.
What Is the Purpose of the Output? What user and organization tasks are supported? Consider 
the purpose of the output when choosing output technology. If it is intended to be a report created 
to attract shareholders to the business by allowing them to peruse corporate finances at their lei-
sure, well-designed, printed output such as an annual report is desirable. A variety of media may 
also be used so that the annual report is available on the web as well as in printed form. The web 
page shown in Figure 11.3 provides a series of six brief video clips to document an actual event, 
the Knowledge Bowl, put on by the Decision Sciences Institute (DSI). These clips show several 
founders and past presidents of DSI, a nonprofit academic society that is supported by a diverse 
board and includes various disciplines. Video output is useful here because the event was held to 
commemorate an important anniversary in the organization’s history. It serves a historic purpose.
If the purpose of output may be to provide instant updates on stock market quotes, and if 
the material is highly encoded and changeable, screen crawls, chyrons (captions superimposed 
over the lower part of a video image during a newscast), web pages, or audio presentations are 
preferable. Output must support user tasks, such as performing analysis or determining ratios, so 
software tools, including calculators and embedded formulas, could be part of the output. Output 
must also support organization tasks such as tracking, scheduling, and monitoring.
What Is the Speed with Which Output Is Needed? As we go through the three levels of strategic, 
middle, and operations management in an organization, we find that decision makers at the lowest 
level of operations management need output rapidly to quickly adjust to events such as a stopped 
assembly line, raw materials not arriving on time, or a worker being absent unexpectedly. Online 
screen output may be useful here.
As we ascend the management levels, we observe that strategic managers are more in need of 
output for a specific time period, which helps in forecasting business cycles and trends.
How Frequently Will the Output Be Accessed? The more frequently output is accessed, the more 
important is the capability to view it on a display connected to local area networks or the web. 
Infrequently accessed output that is needed by only a few users is well suited to an archive, which 
could be cloud based.
FIGURE 11.3
Streaming video can be used 
effectively for telling a story or 
sharing an event. This web page 
chronicles an event called the  
DSI Knowledge Bowl. (Used with 
permission from Microsoft)


===== BOOK PAGE 327 =====

CHAPTER 11  •  DEsigning EffECTivE  OuTPuT     327
Output that is accessed frequently is a good candidate for incorporation into web-based or 
other online systems or networks with displays. Adopting this type of technology allows users 
easy access and alleviates physical wear and tear that cause frequently handled printed output to 
deteriorate.
How Long Will (or Must) the Output Be Stored? Output printed on paper deteriorates rapidly 
with age. Output preserved on microforms or digitized in archives is not as prone to succumb to 
environmental disturbances such as light, humidity, and human handling. Some microforms are 
required by government regulations, or for historical purposes. However, if hardware to access 
the archived material is hard to acquire or becomes obsolete, this output method can become 
problematic.
A business may be subject to government regulations on local, state, or federal levels that 
dictate how long output must be kept. If the corporation is willing to maintain it and it is non-
proprietary archival information, it can be maintained in web documents as part of the organiza-
tion’s website. Organizations can enact their own internal policies about how long output must 
be retained. Major companies such as Google, IBM, Amazon, and others offer cloud applications 
that are well suited for this type of storage.
Under What Special Regulations Is the Output Produced, Stored, and Distributed? The appropri-
ate format for some output is regulated by the government. For example, in the United States, 
the statement of an employee’s wages and tax withholding, called a W-2 form, must be printable, 
even if it exists in an enterprise resource planning payroll system such as Oracle. Each business 
in each country exists within a different complex of regulations under which it produces output. 
To that extent, law may dictate appropriate technology for some functions.
Much of this regulation, however, is industry dependent. For example, in the United States a 
regional blood system is required by federal law to keep a medical history of a blood donor—as 
well as their name—on file. The exact output form is not specified, but the content is strictly 
spelled out.
What Are the Initial and Ongoing Costs of Maintenance and Supplies? The initial costs of 
purchasing or leasing equipment must be considered as yet another factor in the choice of output 
technology. Most vendors will help you estimate the initial purchase or lease costs of computer 
hardware, including the cost of printers and displays, the cost of access to online service providers 
(web access), or the costs of building intranets and extranets. Many vendors, however, do not 
provide information about how much it costs to keep a printer or other technologies working. 
Therefore, it falls to the analyst to research the costs of operating different output technologies or 
of maintaining a corporate website over time.
What Are the Human Environmental Requirements for Output Technologies? Analysts need to 
factor into their output decisions accessibility, noise absorption, controlled temperature, space 
for equipment, cabling, and proximity to Wi-Fi transmitters or access points, called “hot spots.” 
When humans interact with technologies, specific environments help systems run more effec-
tively and efficiently. Users need accessibility and support in accessing web pages as well as 
other output.
Printers require a dry, cool environment to operate properly. Displays require space for setup 
and viewing. Audio and video output require a quiet environment if they are to be heard, and they 
should be audible only to employees (or customers) who are using them. Thus, the analyst should 
not specify audio output for a work situation in which many employees or customers are engaged 
in a variety of tasks unrelated to the output.
To set up wireless local area networks so users can access the web wirelessly, Wi-Fi access 
points need to be made available. These work when computers are within a few hundred feet of 
transmitters but can be subjected to interference by other devices.
Some output technologies are prized for their unobtrusiveness. Libraries and hospitals, which 
emphasize silence in the workplace, make extensive use of displays for web documents and other 
networked database information, but printers might be scarce. Analysts working for a company 
that has sustainability as part of its mission also may want to include the idea of green IT in their 
output decisions. This might translate into putting more transactions, reports, and documents 
online and discouraging printing of email messages.


===== BOOK PAGE 328 =====

328    PART iv •  THE EssEnTiALs  Of  DEsign
REALIZING HOW OUTPUT BIAS AFFECTS USERS
Output is not just a neutral product that is subsequently analyzed and acted on by decision 
makers. Output affects users in many ways. Systems analysts must put great thought and care 
into designing output to avoid biasing it.
Recognizing Bias in the Way Output Is Used
It is a common error to assume that once a systems analyst has signed off on a system project, 
their impact has ended. The analyst’s influence is long lasting. Much of the information on which 
organization members base their decisions is determined by what analysts perceive is important 
to the business.
Bias is present in everything that humans create. This statement is not to judge bias as bad 
but to make the point that it is inseparable from what we (and consequently our systems) produce.  
be from the booths anyway. Let’s go with our original idea and add 
that to the printout,” suggests Turnstile.
Rayl replies, “But I’ve been observing riders. Half of them seem 
to be afraid of the automated ticket vending machines. Others start 
using them, get frustrated reading the directions, or don’t know what 
to do with the ticket that comes out, and they wind up at the ticket 
booth blowing off steam. Furthermore, they can’t understand the rou-
tine information posted on the kiosks, which is all in graphics. They 
wind up asking clerks what train goes where.” Rayl pushes the print-
out holding the ticket sales to one side of the conference table and 
says, “I don’t have much confidence in this report. I feel as if we’re 
sitting here trying to operate the most sophisticated subway system 
in the United States by peering down a tunnel instead of at the infor-
mation, like we should be. I think we need to think seriously about 
capturing journey information on magnetically stripped cards like the 
New York Transit Authority did. Every time you insert the card to take 
a ride, the information is stored. Now they’re letting people just tap 
their devices or smartphones or contactless cards on a reader to enter 
the system. Even better, they can view their trips and charges, man-
age their payments, and ask questions of cutomer service from the 
dashboard on their app. You can even have contactless fare payment 
cards or mobile payment apps where customers don’t have to insert a 
credit or debit card into the machine at all. Very good in a pandemic.”
What are some of the specific problems with the output that the 
systems consultants and Benton Turnstile gave to Barb Rayl? Evalu-
ate the media that are being used for output as well as the timing of 
its distribution. In a paragraph, comment on the external output that 
users of the automated ticket machines are apparently receiving. In 
a second paragraph, suggest some changes in output to help Rayl get 
the information she needs to make decisions on fares and scheduling 
of trains and to help users of the subway system get the information 
they need. List the decisions facing organizations like the New York 
Transit Authority if they collect and store input concerning an indi-
vidual’s destinations each time a trip is taken. What changes would 
S.W.I.F.T. have to make to its output and its tickets if it adopted this 
technology? Reply in a paragraph.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 11.2 
A Right Way, a Wrong Way, and a Subway
“So far, so good. Sure, there have been some complaints, but 
any new subway will have those. The ‘free ride’ gimmick has 
helped attract some people who never would have ridden other -
wise. I think there are more people than ever before interested in 
riding the subway,” says Barb Rayl. “What we need is an accurate 
fix on what ridership has been so far so we can make some adjust-
ments on our fare decisions and scheduling of trains.”
Rayl is an operations manager for S.W.I.F.T., the newly built 
subway for Western Ipswich and Fremont Transport that serves 
a major northeastern city in the United States. She is speaking 
with Benton Turnstile, who reports to her as operations supervisor 
of S.W.I.F.T. The subway system is in its first month of opera-
tion, offering limited lines. Marketing people have been giving 
away free rides on the subway to increase public awareness of 
S.W.I.F.T.
“I think that’s a good idea,” says Turnstile. “It’s not just a token 
effort. We’ll show them we’re really on the right track. I’ll get back 
to you with ridership information soon,” he says.
A month later, Rayl and Turnstile meet to compare the projected 
ridership with the new data. Turnstile proudly presents a 2-inch-high 
stack of computer printouts to Rayl. Rayl looks a little surprised but 
proceeds to go through it with Turnstile. “What all is in here?” Rayl 
asks, fingering the top page of the stack hesitantly.
“Well,” says Turnstile, training his eyes on the printout, “it’s a 
list of all the tickets that were sold from the ticket vending machines. 
It tells us how many tickets were bought and what kinds of tickets 
were bought. The people from Systems That Think, Inc. told me 
this report would be the most helpful for us, just like it was for the 
operations people in Buffalo and Pittsburgh,” says Turnstile, turning 
quickly to the next page.
“Maybe, but remember those subway systems began with really 
limited service. We’re bigger. And what about the sales from the 
three staffed ticket booths in the Main Street Terminal?” asks Rayl.
“The clerks in the booth can get information summarizing ticket 
sales onscreen any time they want it, but it’s not included here. 
Remember that we projected that only 10 percent of our sales would


===== BOOK PAGE 329 =====

CHAPTER 11  •  DEsigning EffECTivE  OuTPuT     329
The concerns of systems analysts are to avoid unnecessarily biasing output and to make users 
aware of the possible biases in the output they receive.
Presentations of output are unintentionally biased in three main ways: (1) how the information 
is sorted, (2) setting of acceptable limits, and (3) choice of graphics.
Introducing Bias when Information Is Sorted. Output bias is introduced when analysts and users 
make choices about how information is sorted for a report. Common sorts include alphabetical, 
chronological, and cost.
Information presented alphabetically may overemphasize the items that begin with the letters 
A and B because users tend to pay more attention to information presented first. For example, if 
past suppliers are listed alphabetically, companies such as Aardvark Printers, Advent Supplies, 
and Barkley Office Equipment are shown to the purchasing manager first. When certain airlines 
created the SABRE and APOLLO reservations systems, they listed their own flights first until the 
other airlines complained that this type of sorting was biased.
Introducing Bias by Setting Limits. A second major source of bias in output is the predefinition of 
limits for particular values being reported. Many reports are generated on an exception basis only, 
which means that when limits on values are set beforehand, only exceptions to those values will be 
output. Exception reports make the decision maker aware of deviations from satisfactory values.
For example, limits that are set too low for exception reports can bias the user’s perception. An 
insurance company that generates exception reports on all accounts one week overdue has set too 
low a limit on overdue payments. The decision maker receiving the output will be overwhelmed 
with “exceptions” that are not really cause for concern. The one-week overdue exception report 
leads to the user’s misperception that there are a great many overdue accounts. A more appropriate 
limit for generating an exception report would be accounts 30 days or more overdue.
Introducing Bias through Graphics. Output is subject to a third type of presentation bias, which 
is brought about by an analyst’s (or user’s) choice of graphics for output display. Bias can occur 
in the selection of the graph size, its color, the scale used, and even the type of graphic.
Graph size must be proportional so the user is not biased as to the importance of the variables that 
are presented. For example, Figure 11.4 shows a column chart comparing the number of no-shows 
for hotel bookings in 2021 with no-shows for hotel bookings in 2022. Notice that the vertical axis 
is broken, and it appears that the number of no-shows for 2022 is twice as much as the number of 
no-shows in 2021, although the number of no-shows has actually gone up only slightly.
Avoiding Bias in the Design of Output
Systems analysts use specific strategies to avoid biasing the output they and others design:
1. Be aware of the sources of bias (whether it is personal, implied, or systemic).
2. Create an interactive design of output during prototyping that includes users and a variety 
of differently configured systems when testing the appearance of web documents.
3. Work with users so that they are informed of the output’s biases and can recognize the 
implications of customizing their displays.
4. Create output that is flexible and that allows users to modify limits and ranges.
5. Train users to rely on multiple outputs for conducting “reality tests” on system output.
FIGURE 11.4
A misleading graph will most 
likely bias the user.
This diagram
doesn’t give
the true
picture.
Number of
No-Shows
400
410
420
430
440
450
2021 2022


===== BOOK PAGE 330 =====

330    PART iv •  THE EssEnTiALs  Of  DEsign
All these strategies except the first focus on the relationship between a systems analyst and 
users as it involves output. Systems analysts need to recognize the potential impact of output 
and be aware of the possible ways in which output is unintentionally biased. They then need to be 
proactive in helping users design output with minimal, but identifiable, biases.
DESIGNING PRINTED OUTPUT
The source of information to be included in reports is the data dictionary (see Chapter 8). The 
data dictionary includes names of data elements as well as the required field length of each entry.
Reports fall into three categories: detailed, exception, and summary. Detailed reports 
print a report line for every record on the master file. They are used for mailings to customers, 
sending student grade reports, printing catalogs, and so on. Inquiry screens have replaced many 
detailed reports.
Exception reports print a line for all records that match a set of conditions, such as which 
holiday decorations will be discounted the day after the holiday or which students are on the dean’s 
list. They are usually used to help operations managers and clerical staff run a business. Summary 
reports print one line for a group of records and are used to make decisions, such as which items 
are not selling and which are hot selling.
A systems designer must understand that some website visitors might prefer to print out 
content. Consider inserting PDFs that can be downloaded and try printing each page in different 
browsers to ensure pages will have a professional look if a user prints them.
DESIGNING OUTPUT FOR DISPLAYS
Output for displays differs from printed output in several ways. It is ephemeral (that is, a display is 
not permanent in the same way that printouts are), it can be more specifically targeted to the user, it 
is available on a more flexible schedule, it is not portable in the same way, and sometimes it can be 
changed through direct interaction. Chapter 12 covers designing displays for human or computer 
input, and these guidelines apply for designing output as well, although the contents are different.
In addition, users must be instructed on which keys to press, which links to follow, and how 
to scroll when they want to continue reading additional displays, when they want to know how to 
end the display, and when they want to know how to interact with the display (if possible). User 
access to displays may be controlled through a password, whereas distribution of printed output 
is controlled by other means.
Guidelines for Display Design
Four guidelines facilitate the design of displays:
1. Keep the display simple.
2. Keep the presentation consistent.
3. Facilitate user movement among displayed output.
4. Create an attractive and pleasing display.
Just as with printed output, good displays are not created in isolation. Systems analysts need 
the feedback of users to design worthwhile displays. Once approved by users after successive 
prototypes and refinements, the display layout can be finalized.
The output produced from the design display is pictured in Figure 11.5. Notice that it is 
uncluttered, but it still gives a basic summary of the shipping status. The display orients users as 
to what they are looking at with the use of a heading. Instructions at the bottom of the display 
provide users with several options, including continuing the present display, ending the display, 
getting help, or getting more detail. This display provides context for users attempting to complete 
a task such as checking on the status of an order.
Output displays in an application should show information consistently from page to page. 
Figure 11.6 shows the display that results when the user positions the cursor over the order number 
for a particular retailer. The new display presents more details on Bear Bizarre. In the body of 
the display, the user can see the retailer’s order number, complete address, the order date, and the 
status. In addition, a detailed breakdown of the shipment and a detailed status of each part of


===== BOOK PAGE 331 =====

CHAPTER 11  •  DEsigning EffECTivE  OuTPuT     331
the shipment are given. A contact name and phone number are supplied, along with the account 
balance, credit rating, and shipment history. Notice that the bottom portion of the display advises 
the user of options, including more details, ending the display, or getting help. Users are provided 
control over what they might do next while viewing the display.
Rather than crowding all retailer information onto one page, the analyst has made it possible 
for the user to bring up a particular retailer if a problem or question arises. If, for example, the 
summary indicates that an order was only partially shipped, the user can check further on the order 
by calling up a detailed retailer display and then following up with appropriate action.
Using Graphical Output in Screen Design
Graphical output can be powerful. It is much easier to identify a trend or notice a pattern when 
the right graph is displayed. Most people notice differences in graphs more easily than they notice 
differences in tables. It is important to collaborate with users in choosing the correct style of graph 
to communicate the intended meaning.
FIGURE 11.6
If users want more details regard-
ing the shipping status, they can 
call up a separate screen.
Order # Retailer Order Date Order Status
933603 Bear Bizarre 09/02/2022 Partially Shipped
1001 Karhu Lane
Bern, Virginia 22024
Press any key to see the rest of the list; ESC to end; ? for help.
Units Pkg Description Price Amount Detailed Status 
12 Each Floppy Bears 20.00 240.00 Backordered Due 10/15 
6 Each Growlers 25.00 150.00 Backordered Due 10/15 
2 Each Special Edition 70.00 140.00 Shipped 09/02
1 Box Celebrity Mix 150.00 150.00 Shipped 09/02
12 Each Polar Bears 10.00 120.00 Backordered Due 10/30 
800.00
Contact Account Balance Credit Rating Last Order Shipped
Ursula Major 0.00 Excellent 08/21/2022 On Time
703-484-2327
FIGURE 11.5
The New Zoo output display 
screen is uncluttered and orients 
users well.
Retailer Order # Order Date Order Status
Animals Unlimited 933401 09/05/2022 Shipped On 09/29
934567 09/11/2022 Shipped On 09/21 
934613 09/13/2022 Shipped On 09/21
934691 09/14/2022 Shipped On 09/21
Bear Bizarre 933603 09/02/2022 Partially Shipped
933668 09/08/2022 Scheduled For 10/03
934552 09/18/2022 Scheduled For 10/03
934683 09/18/2022 Shipped On 09/28
Cuddles Co. 933414 09/12/2022 Shipped On 09/18
933422 09/14/2022 Shipped On 09/21
934339 09/16/2022 Shipped On 09/26
934387 09/18/2022 Shipped On 09/21
934476 09/25/2022 Backordered
Stuﬀed Stuﬀ 934341 09/14/2022 Shipped On 09/26
934591 09/18/2022 Partially Shipped
934633 09/26/2022 Backordered
934664 09/29/2022 Partially Shipped 
New Zoo Order Status
Press any key to see the rest of the list; ESC to end; ? for help.
For more detail place cursor over the order number and hit the Enter key.


===== BOOK PAGE 332 =====

332    PART iv •  THE EssEnTiALs  Of  DEsign
an all-time high in 2020. We were real crowd pleasers that year. 
Could’ve sold seats on the scoreboard if they let me. Unfortunately, 
ticket sales were at an all-time low in 2022. I mean, we’re talking 
about a disaster. Tickets moved slower than a glacier. I had to con-
vince the players to give tickets away when they made appearances 
at the shopping mall. Why, just look at this table, it’s terrible.
“I think computerizing the ticket sales will help us pick out who 
our season supporters are. We’ve got to figure out who they are and 
get them back. Get them to stick with us. That would be a good goal 
to shoot for,” Andy concludes.
As Andy’s presentation finally winds down, Hy looks as if 
he thought the 20-minute period would never end. Picking up on 
his signal, Fiona says, “Thanks for the data, Andy. We’ll work on 
getting them into the report somehow.”
As Fiona and Rip head out of the room with Andy, Hy realizes 
the bench has emptied, so he asks you, the fourth team member, to 
coach Andy on his bar chart by making a list of the problems you 
see in it. Hy would also like you to sketch some alternative ways to 
graph the data on ticket sales so that a correct and persuasive graph 
of ticket sales can be included in the systems proposal. Draw two 
alternatives.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 11.3 
Should This Chart Be Barred?
“Gee, I’m glad they hired you guys. I know the Redwings will 
be better next season because of you. My job’ll be a lot easier too,” 
says Andy Skors, ticket manager for the Kitchener, Ontario, hockey 
team, the Kitchener Redwings. Andy has been working with your 
systems analysis team on analyzing the systems requirements for 
computerizing ticket sales.
When we last heard from the systems analysis team—consisting 
of Hy Sticking (your leader), Rip Shinpadd, Fiona Wrink, and 
you—they were wrestling with whether to expedite the project 
and set team productivity goals (see Consulting Opportunity 3.5, 
“Goal Tending”).
Andy is talking with the team about what to include in 
the systems proposal to make it as persuasive as possible to the 
Redwings’ management. “I know they’re going to like this chart,” 
Andy continues. “It’s a little something I drew up after you asked 
me all those questions on past ticket sales, Rip.”
Andy hands the bar chart to Rip, who looks at it and suppresses 
a slight smile. “As long as we have you here, Andy, why don’t you 
explain it to us?”
Like a player fresh out of the penalty box, Andy skates smoothly 
into his narrative of the graph. “Well, our ticket sales reached 
FIGURE 11. C1
An incorrectly drawn graph.
2020
2019
2018
2021
2022
Best year
Worst year
15,643
14,880
14,100
13,254
12,690
7,505
6,808
7,089
6,735
6,351
Status Year
Average
tickets sold
per game
Season
tickets sold
per season
What is wrong
with this
chart?
          -Hy
2020
11,000
10,0009,0008,0007,0006,0005,000
12,000 13,000 14,000 15,000
2019
2018
2021
2022


===== BOOK PAGE 333 =====

CHAPTER 11  •  DEsigning EffECTivE  OuTPuT     333
As with the presentation of tabular output, graphical output needs to be accurate and easy 
to understand and use if it is to be effective in communicating information to users. Decision 
makers using the graphs need to know the assumptions (biases) under which the graphs are being 
constructed so they can adjust to or compensate for them.
In designing graphical output, a systems analyst and any users involved in design prototyping 
must determine (1) the purpose of the graph, (2) the kind of data that need to be displayed,  
(3) its audience, and (4) the effects on the audience of different kinds of graphical output. In the 
instance of a decision support system, the purposes of graphical displays are to support any of 
the three phases of problem solving a user experiences: intelligence, design, or choice. An example 
from the Nebraska State Patrol workforce planning DSS is shown in Figure 11.7. Here, current 
response times, forecasted response times, and minimum requirements are graphed as differently  
shaded bars.
Dashboards
Decision makers need output that helps them make decisions effectively and quickly. It helps exec-
utives and other decision makers if all the information they need to make decisions is displayed 
in front of them. When given a written report, a decision maker would prefer all the information 
to be contained in that one report rather than searching for information in other places. The same 
principle applies to screen design.
A dashboard, like the dashboard in a car, has many different gauges. Each gauge can display 
a graph (similar to the speed in miles or kilometers per hour), a problem light (similar to a light 
showing that the automatic braking system is not functioning), or even text (such as an odometer 
that simply counts the miles traveled).
An executive can find a dashboard to be extremely useful in making decisions, but only if the 
dashboard is designed properly. The dashboard in Figure 11.8 shows that a considerable amount 
of information can be included on a single screen. Using infographics (discussed elsewhere in 
this chapter) can help.
Dashboards are all about communicating measurements to the user. An executive uses a 
dashboard to review performance measures and to act if the information on the screen calls for 
it. An example of visualization software that helps in developing dashboards for decision makers 
displaying data analytics is Tableau. Here are some designing rules of thumb that make dashboards 
more attractive and more effective.
Make Sure the Data Have Context. If a screen states that sales last month were $851,235, what 
does that mean? Are sales above or below average?
FIGURE 11.7
A bar chart display for onscreen 
inspection of troop time response.
50
Current
Time (in
minutes)
Average Response Time per Troop Area
Nebraska State Patrol
HQ A B C D E State
MinimumForecasted
Troop Area Workforce
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0


===== BOOK PAGE 334 =====

334    PART iv •  THE EssEnTiALs  Of  DEsign
Display the Proper Amount of Summarization and Precision. It will clutter the screen if last 
month’s sales are displayed as $851,235.32 instead of $851,235 or even $851K.
Choose Appropriate Performance Measures for Display. For example, plotting the difference 
in actual versus expected sales in a deviation chart is much more meaningful than using a line 
chart to plot actual and expected sales.
Present Data Fairly. Introducing bias into the dashboard will hinder rather than support good 
decisions.
Choose the Correct Style of Graph or Chart for Display. Using the correct chart is important. 
While a pie chart may be an excellent graph to persuade someone, it may not be a good way for 
an executive to monitor the performance of regional offices, for example.
Use Well-Designed Display Media. Even the very best type of graph still needs good design to 
draw, size, color, and label the graph in a meaningful and pleasing way.
Limit the Variety of Item Types. Keep the number of graph, chart, and table styles to a minimum 
so the information can be communicated quickly and accurately.
Highlight Important Data. Use bright colors and bold fonts only for important data. Highlight 
key performance measures or important exceptions that are occurring, but not both. Choose what 
to emphasize.
Arrange the Data in Meaningful Groups. Performance measures are almost always associated 
with related performance measures because of the data displayed or the type of graph. Learn how 
to group associated items together.
Keep the Screen Uncluttered. Avoid photographs, ornate logos, or themes that can distract 
users from the data.
Keep the Entire Dashboard on a Single Screen. All the performance measures are meant to 
be on the same screen. If forced to switch screens, a user will not see two relevant measures at 
the same time.
Allow Flexibility. If an executive wants a different graph or chart, consider replacing it. Proto-
typing the dashboard and refining it based on the user’s feedback makes sense. Decision makers 
often know best when it comes to getting the right information in the most appropriate form for 
their decision style.
FIGURE 11.8
This dashboard has a variety of 
displays depicting performance 
measurements to help make 
decisions.


===== BOOK PAGE 335 =====

CHAPTER 11  •  DEsigning EffECTivE  OuTPuT     335
Infographics
Some users have a difficult time getting information from tables. Either users “get lost” in all of 
the numbers or they see so many tables that they get tired of looking at them. Graphs and charts 
are effective, but the trend is to combine numbers, charts, and different types of graphs together 
in one view at the same time in an infographic.
The term infographic can mean any graph, chart, or picture that communicates the data better 
than words or tables. To the designer, it means visually displaying data for the user to see and 
choosing which type of graph or chart, or even which numbers, are most appropriate.
Designers have many options for creating an infographic page either on paper or on a web 
page. One web-based application for making infographics is called Piktochart (https://piktochart.
com). An example of an infographic developed with Picktochart software is shown in Figure 11.9. 
It depicts data about software adoption using many visual elements including icons, a pie chart, an 
area graph, text, and customer rankings from 1 to 5 as stars. Customer satisfaction is also pictured 
FIGURE 11.9
An infographic using a variety of 
design elements to visually pres-
ent data about customer software 
adoption over time.


===== BOOK PAGE 336 =====

336    PART iv •  THE EssEnTiALs  Of  DEsign
by the extent of the frown or smile the character is sporting. Notice the artist has used a limited 
color palette of red, teal, and black against a buff-colored background. Red is a high-energy color 
that attracts attention to important information on the infographic.
Infographics should be newsworthy. Start the infographic with a headline, something brief 
but catchy. Then artfully design a small page of information and mix in visuals that together tell a 
story. These design elements include charts and graphs, images (mostly icons and cartoons—only 
rarely should photos be used), summary information in brief text, and contact information or 
some action the reader might want to take. The most viewed and shared content on social media 
is visual, so it makes sense to design infographics to convey content you want shared.
DATA VISUALIZATION
Data visualization is the representation of data in the form of a chart, diagram, map, or other 
visual. It is used to make complex data understandable. For many people, seeing data displayed in 
a chart or map is easier to comprehend than if the same data were displayed in a table. Commercial 
data visualization packages are available for Tableau, QlikView, and Zoho.
An interesting site for data visualizations is hosted by Datawrapper. In addition to the tools 
available for data visualizations, Datawrapper hosts a community-based site called “The River.” 
They describe it as a place to exchange charts and other graphics with other Datawrapper users. 
Anyone can visit The River, find a visualization, customize the chart in Datawrapper, and publish 
it to their website. Examples from the River can be found in Figure 11.10.
There are organizations that collect data. These sources include The World Bank, World 
Health Organization (WHO), International Monetary Fund (IMF), and assorted nongovernmental 
organizations (NGOs). There are also people—for example, journalists—who report on this data. 
The problem is that creating charts and graphs is time-consuming. Data must be downloaded from 
the collector, processed using Microsoft Excel, R, or other data visualization app, then designed 
(selecting the size of the chart and margins, choosing fonts, writing titles, and adding footnotes). 
The River allows the reporter to find an appropriate style and get the visualization up and running 
as quickly and effortlessly as possible.
The data visualizations posted on The River make it possible to go well beyond basic 
charts and graphs to provide enhanced graphics efficiently. Enhanced graphics can show more 
variables and more types of variables on a single diagram. Furthermore, the software can identify 
trends, patterns, and even reasons for outliers in data. This makes data visualization a very  
powerful tool.
Some advantages of using data visualization are:
1. Viewing data in a better way
2. Identifying trends and patterns
3. Seeing more than one attribute at a time
4. Making decisions quickly
5. Communicating information to others in a more effective manner
R has become one of the most commonly used languages in data mining. It is an open 
source and free-to-use language that is suitable for data visualizations. The British Broadcasting 
Company (BBC) has created a package and instructions for drawing graphics similar to the ones 
used in BBC reports. It will take a lot of practice to achieve the skills that created the graphics; 
however, the tutorials are worthwhile.
Here are some dos and don’ts regarding visualization. First, here are the dos:
1. Do choose the right graphic.
2. Do use color wisely.
3. Do plot different variables or attributes on the same diagram if possible.
4. Do realize that various customers will perceive the visualization differently.
And here are some of the don’ts:
1. Don’t choose the wrong style graphic.
2. Don’t turn visualization into an infographic.
3. Don’t introduce bias into the visualization.
4. Don’t expect everyone to prefer the visualization you created.


===== BOOK PAGE 337 =====

CHAPTER 11  •  DEsigning EffECTivE  OuTPuT     337
FIGURE 11.10
The River, by Datawrapper, is a place where data visualizations can be reused by those who want to show statistics graphically.  
(Courtesy: Datawrapper)
Data Visualization and the NYC Subway System
Assume that not everyone will understand or appreciate the graphics you create through data 
visualization. Take, for example, the Metropolitan Transit Authority (MTA) maps designed for 
the New York City subway system, a system of trains that delivers almost 6 million rides daily. 
Its extensive system map has been redesigned many times.
The last major design update was made in 1979 to replace a beautifully drawn abstract map 
from 1972 that received many complaints because the geography was distorted to give the map of 
subway lines a cleaner look. The problem was that it made stations look closer than they were, 
and it was difficult to determine which station was closer to a rider’s destination.
In designing the 1979 maps, it is reported that the designers rode the entire subway system 
with their eyes closed so they could feel the curves. The map (see Figure 11.11) incorporates those 
curves as well as clues to orienting oneself above ground. For example, the lakes (in blue, still


===== BOOK PAGE 338 =====

338    PART iv •  THE EssEnTiALs  Of  DEsign
FIGURE 11.11
The current Metropolitan Transit Authority (MTA) map, originally designed in 1979 for the New York City subway system, featured curves to 
help riders orient themselves. (Metropolitan Transportation Authority)
FIGURE 11.12
The new experimental Metropolitan Transit Authority subway map depicts subway lines as sharp angles and shows only minimal 
geographic details. Will riders prefer this new angular design to the existing design? (Metropolitan Transportation Authority)


===== BOOK PAGE 339 =====

CHAPTER 11  •  DEsigning EffECTivE  OuTPuT     339
FIGURE 11.13
The new interactive Metropolitan Transit Authority subway map can do more than can be accomplished on a paper map as it orients the 
map for a particular rider. (Metropolitan Transportation Authority)
misshapen) in Central Park (in green and identified by name) helps riders determine which station 
to use and to orient themselves once they ascend the stairs to street level. Much of the map was 
still distorted, but the 1979 map was viewed more favorably by New Yorkers (Genzlinger, 2020).
The map was a success, even though it broke a lot of the conventional wisdom of design. For 
example, it is suggested that a design uses three or four font styles, yet there are about 20 different 
font styles in various sizes, colors, weights, and kerning (the spacing between characters) on the MTA 
map. Somehow it works and with a few tweaks here and there, the map survived for over 40 years.
As this book is being written, MTA has rolled out a new map (shown in Figure 11.12) and is 
asking for feedback. At this time, we don’t know whether it will be accepted by New Yorkers. You 
may first notice that Central Park is still there in green, but the lakes do not appear. The other very 
noticeable aspect is the way the subway lines are depicted. In this new map, subway lines R, W, 
N, and Q are each represented by a line. In the 1979 map, these four lines would be represented 
by one “trunk” line. Curves have become sharper angles.
MTA also introduced a new digitally interactive subway map in 2020, shown in Figure 11.13, 
and this may or may not be MTA’s biggest success (Goldbaum, 2020). The map, created by  
Work & Co on a pro bono basis, is geographically correct, but because it’s interactive, the map 
reconfigures itself based on the needs of the rider. A rider can see where they are at a given 
moment on an expanded view of the subway line they are riding.
The map is certainly valuable to visitors to the city and to everyone who needs to know 
whether a subway line is not functioning, but will it be more useful than posted signs, maps, and 
Google or Apple maps that are in use today? We think that depends on the improvements that will 
follow. We still need a separate app to tell us which car on a long train will open up its doors to 
the closest station staircase to our destination.
Expect that data visualizations will continue to improve people’s lives in many ways.
DESIGNING A WEBSITE
Borrow some design principles from other displays when designing a website. Remember, though, 
that the key word here is site. The first documents displayed on the internet using the HTTP pro-
tocol were called home pages, but it became apparent very quickly that companies, universities,


===== BOOK PAGE 340 =====

340    PART iv •  THE EssEnTiALs  Of  DEsign
governments, and people were not going to be displaying just one page. The term website replaced 
home page in many instances, indicating that the array of pages would have to be organized, 
coordinated, designed, developed, and maintained in an orderly process. Sometimes the initial 
web page the user lands on is referred to as a landing page.
Printing is a highly controlled medium, and the analyst has a very good idea of what the 
output will look like. Graphical user interface and character-based user interface screens are also 
highly controlled. The web, however, is a very uncontrolled environment for output.
Responsive Web Design
Different browsers display images differently, and screen resolution has a large influence on the 
look and feel of a website. There is no “standard” resolution anymore. For many years displays 
had a 4:3 aspect ratio and common resolutions were 1024 × 768 pixels or 1600 × 1200 pixels. 
Now displays are made for HD and have a 16:9 aspect ratio. The issue is further complicated by 
the use of handheld devices, such as smartphones and tablets, that are used to browse the web. The 
complexity deepens when you realize that each person may set a browser to use different fonts  
and may disable the use of JavaScript, cookies, and other web programming elements. Analysts and 
users face many decisions when designing a website.
Responsive web design means that a website is developed so that it can be viewed on any 
device: a desktop, tablet, or smartphone. This includes seeing all the content, experiencing the 
same design concepts, and being able to perform all of the tasks on any device. Websites are 
designed in percentages rather than a fixed number of pixels.
Although a web designer may easily implement responsive web design for a particular com-
pany, problems may occur because advertising used on the website (banners, for example) may 
not be designed to be fluid. To overcome this, a web designer might need to develop different 
landing pages for each type of device.
Alternatively, Ajax can recognize a device and display different-sized advertising components 
on a page. Adaptive web design means that a different design layout is chosen to be displayed 
depending on the device. Adaptive design uses a fixed grid rather than the fluid (percentage) 
grid in responsive web design. Some designers think this approach is more flexible if the design 
and abilities of a particular device change over time.
Cloud-based approaches to web design such as Weebly or Wix use a drag-and-drop approach, 
and novice users can design a website quickly and without any knowledge of HTML code. They 
use a WYSIWYG (or “what you see is what you get”) interface. Both of these services are cur -
rently free but limited in features because they are based or a freemium model. Users can pay 
to have the companies obtain a domain name for them and host a website. Although it is easy to 
develop a website with these cloud-based approaches, transferring a developed site to another 
hosting company presents an obstacle.
Stand-alone web design development software is also available. These packages are full of 
features, have no advertising watermark, and are not host-specific. Working with stand-alone web 
design development software makes it is easier to move a website if the customer is not pleased 
with the service the hosting company is providing.
Flat Web Design
Recently, web design trends moved away from skeuomorphic design to flat web design. In skeuo-
morphic design, objects were meant to look realistic and three-dimensional, with shadows added 
to artwork. For example, a circle and a drop shadow would represent a button. This is fake realism. 
In addition, note pads would have spiral bindings, an address book would have rifled pages, and 
a blotter would represent a desktop. These images became time-worn representations of office 
elements not currently in use.
Flat web design, however, is a minimalistic approach to design. In comparison to skeuo-
morphic design, flat web design is clean, two-dimensional, and simple in many ways, including a 
bright color palette that is adhered to in all design. The idea behind this approach is to concentrate 
on only what is necessary. But it also makes it very clear that digital apps are distinct from their 
physical and tactile relatives.
Figure 11.14 compares the skeuomorphic icons of familiar objects, such as a calendar and 
a cell phone, with those same objects rendered in flat web design, which is an abstracted image 
that does not depict the shadows and contours of the physical world.


===== BOOK PAGE 341 =====

CHAPTER 11  •  DEsigning EffECTivE  OuTPuT     341
Flat web design’s popularity will make way for other web design approaches. We are begin-
ning to see a resurgence in realistic 3-D or skeuomorphic design. As you develop new apps and 
websites, keep searching for new design elements such as an emphasis on creative type fonts, 
textured backgrounds, illustrated sites, map-centered sites, and sites that have subtle motion.
General Guidelines for Designing Websites
In addition to the general design elements discussed earlier in this chapter, there are specific 
guidelines appropriate for the design of professional-quality websites:
Use Professional Tools. Consider using web editor software such as Adobe Dreamweaver or 
Website X5 Evolution (for Windows) or Rapidweaver (for Mac OS). These tools are definitely 
worth the price. You’ll be more creative and you’ll get the website finished much faster than if 
you work directly with hypertext markup language (HTML). Another option is to design a website 
using Weebly or Wix, but this approach might limit you from transferring the website to another 
hosting firm.
Study Other Websites. Look at websites you and other users think are engaging. Analyze what 
design elements are being used and see how they are functioning and then try to emulate what you 
see by creating prototype pages. (It is not ethical or legal to cut and paste pictures or code, but 
you can still learn from the other sites.)
Examine the Work of Professional Designers. As you look at professionally designed pages, 
ask yourself, “What works? What doesn’t work? In what ways can users interact with the site?” 
For example, does the site have hot links to email addresses, interactive forms to fill in, consumer 
surveys, games, quizzes, chat rooms, blogs, and so on? What about color schemes and pervasive 
metaphors?
Use the Tools You’ve Learned. Figure 11.15 shows a form web designers have used successfully 
to evaluate web pages systematically. You might want to use copies of the form to help compare 
and contrast the many websites you will visit as you go about learning web page design.
Use Storyboarding, Wireframing, and Mockups. Designing for the web brought back a prac-
tice known in the film industry as storyboarding. In the 1930s at Walt Disney Studios, each 
scene was drawn on a piece of paper and then tacked to a bulletin board in order of the episodes. 
(To see a fun and succinct animated version of storyboarding, check out https://disneyanimation 
.com/process/story/.)
In developing a website (or any app, for that matter), a storyboard could be used to show 
the differences between screens. It can show how a visitor to the site would navigate the website 
to find the information desired. Now storyboards can be developed in Microsoft PowerPoint or 
Apple’s Keynote by clicking on the slide organizer, and they can be drawn in Microsoft Visio 
or OmniGraffle as well.
Page design can be accomplished using a process called wireframing, which shows only the 
basics. There is no color, no type style. Graphics are shown as a simple box with an X drawn in 
it. In this way, each of the items acts as a placeholder.
FIGURE 11.14
Comparing skeuomorphic (3-D, 
realistic) icons with those drawn 
using flat web design.
Skeuomorphic
Design
Flat Design


===== BOOK PAGE 342 =====

342    PART iv •  THE EssEnTiALs  Of  DEsign
Wireframing allows the designer to plan:
1. The overall design, showing what element appears at each position on the page
2. The navigational design, showing how to move from one page to the next using buttons, 
tabs, links, and pull-down menus
3. The interface design, showing how to interact with the website by inputting data or 
responding to questions
An alternative to a wireframe is a mockup. Mockups show what the output and input will 
look like before programming the underlying code to make the program or application functional.
Software that helps a systems designer develop a mockup is abundant. Built into the software 
are objects that can be dragged and dropped onto the screen. Templates are available for any type 
of display including desktops, notebooks, smartphones, and tablets. When designing for smart-
phones and tablets, both screen orientations are included. Both wireframing and mockups are a 
form of nonoperational prototyping discussed previously in Chapter 6.
Create Templates of Your Own. If you adopt a standard-looking page for most of the pages you 
create, you’ll get the website up and running quickly and it will consistently look good. Websites 
may be made using cascading style sheets (CSSs), a language that allows a designer to specify 
the color, font size, font type, and many other attributes only once. These attributes are stored in 
a style sheet file and applied to many web pages. If a designer changes a specification in the style 
sheet file, all the web pages using that style sheet will be updated to reflect the new style.
Use Extensions, Plug-Ins, Audio, and Video Sparingly. It is wonderful to include features that 
the professional pages have but remember that everyone looking at your site doesn’t have every 
new plug-in or extension. Don’t discourage visitors to your page.
Specific Guidelines for Website Design
Good websites are well thought out. Pay attention to the following:
1. Structure
2. Content
FIGURE 11.15
A website evaluation form.
 Website Critique
Analyst’s Name
URL VisitedTime Visited:
Date Visited:
DESIGN
Needs
Improvement Excellent
Overall Appearance
Use of Graphics
Use of Color
Use of Sound/Video (Multimedia)
Use of New Technology and Products
Content
Navigability
Site Management and Communications
COMMENTS:
CONTENT & INTERACTIVITY
SCORE
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
5
5
5
5
5
4
4
4
4
4
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
5
5
5
4
4
4
3
3
3
2
2
2
/40


===== BOOK PAGE 343 =====

CHAPTER 11  •  DEsigning EffECTivE  OuTPuT     343
“This stuff looks terrible. It looks like scraps. My kindergar -
dener makes better reports in crayon. Look at it. It’s all ground up 
together. I can’t find anything. Where’s the summary of the number 
of beef items sold in each outlet? Where is the total volume of items 
sold for all outlets? How about the information on our own shop 
downtown?” says Kwon, slicing at the report.
The report clearly needs to be redesigned. Design a report (or 
reports) that better suits Ari Kwon. What approach can the analyst take 
in suggesting more reports with a less-crowded format? Use a paragraph 
to comment on the difficulty of implementing user suggestions that go 
against your design training. What are the trade-offs involved (as far as 
information overload goes) in generating numerous reports as opposed 
to generating one large report containing all the information Ari wants? 
Devise and write a heuristic (a rule of thumb) concerning the display 
of report information on one report in contrast to the generation of 
numerous reports. Consider advocating a web-based or app-based 
dashboard solution that would permit hyperlinks to all the information 
Ari desires. How feasible is that? Respond in a paragraph.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 11.4 
Is Your Work a Grind?
“I want everything I can get my hands on, and the tighter the 
information is packed, the better. Forget that stuff you hear about 
information overload. It’s not in my vocabulary. I want it all, and 
not in a bunch of pretty-looking, half-page reports either. I want it 
all together, packed on one sheet that I can take into a meeting in 
case I need to look something up. And I need it every week,” pro-
claims Ari Kwon, vice president of Links Meats, a large, family-
owned sausage company.
During an interview, Kwon has been grilling Eun Lee, who is 
part of the systems analysis team that is busy designing an infor -
mation system for Links Meats. Although Eun is hesitant about 
what Kwon has told her, she proceeds to design a printed report 
that includes all the important items the team has settled on during 
the analysis phase.
When a prototype of the new report, designed to her specifica-
tions, is handed to Ari, however, there appears to be a change of 
heart. Kwon says in no uncertain terms that she can’t find what 
she needs.
3. Text
4. Graphics
5. Presentation style
6. Navigation
7. Promotion
Structure. Planning the structure of a website is one of the most important steps in developing a 
professional website. Think about your goals and objectives. Each page in the overall web struc-
ture should have a distinct message or other related information. Sometimes it is useful to examine 
professional sites to analyze them for content and features. Figure 11.16 is a screen capture from 
the DinoTech website. The purpose for the site and the web medium work well together. Notice 
that there is great attention to supporting users on the site. There are words, graphics, JPEG 
images, and icons. In addition, there are many kinds of links: to RSS feeds, video, subwebs, chat 
rooms, a search engine, and many other features.
To help plan and maintain a solid structure, a web developer can benefit from using one of 
the many website diagramming and mapping tools available. Many software packages have web 
charting options built into the software. Although helpful for development, these tools become 
even more important when maintaining a website. Given the dynamic nature of the web, sites 
that are linked to your site may move at any time, requiring you or your web developer to update 
the links. Look for applications that perform web functionality testing or website error checking.
Content. Provide something important to website users. Exciting animation, movies, and sound 
are fun, but you must include appropriate content to keep the user interested. Supply some timely 
advice, important information, a free offer, a top 10 list of tips on the page’s topic, or any activity 
that you can provide that is interactive and moves users away from a browsing mode and into an 
interactive one.
“Stickiness” is a quality a website can possess. If a user stays at your site for a long period 
of time, your site has a high degree of stickiness. That is why a merchant includes many items of 
interest on a site. An online travel company, for example, may post videos on how to successfully 
pack a carry-on bag for a weekend stay or a months-long trip to a foreign country.


===== BOOK PAGE 344 =====

344    PART iv •  THE EssEnTiALs  Of  DEsign
Use a metaphor or images that provide a metaphor for your site. You can use a theme, such  
as a storefront, with additional pages having a variety of metaphors related to the storefront, 
such as a deli. Avoid the overuse of cartoons, and don’t be repetitive.
Every website should include an FAQ (frequently asked questions) page. Often these are 
created based on the experiences of users and technical support people who identify the topics of 
continuing concern. Eighty percent of the questions will fall into the FAQ category. By having 
answers readily available, 24 hours a day, you will save valuable employee time and also save 
user time. FAQ pages also demonstrate to users of your site that you are in concert with them and 
have a good idea of what they would like to know.
A website may take advantage of prewritten applications. Examples include search engines, 
mapping software, weather information, and news and stock tickers. Website designers value 
these packages because they can increase the functionality of the site, and the additional features 
encourage users to bookmark their clients’ websites because they provide valuable bonus content.
Text. Remember that text is important too. Each web page should have a title. Place meaningful 
words in the first sentence appearing on your web page. Let people know that they have indeed 
navigated to the right website. Clear writing is especially important.
Content on ecommerce sites needs to be constantly updated. Content management systems 
(CMSs) are powerful software tools that can enable the analyst to develop and maintain websites 
and other online applications. An increasingly popular CMS is Joomla!, which can be found 
at https://www.joomla.org. It is based on PHP and MySQL. Unlike proprietary CMSs, which 
are expensive and not widely available, Joomla! is an open source solution that is made freely 
available to any developer under a general public license (GPL).
FIGURE 11.16
The DinoTech website makes the most of links, RSS feeds, video subscriptions, and banner ads. (Used with permission from Microsoft)
Website logo Feature storyJPEG image
Video
subscription
Quick links Main
stories
Chat roomsAdvertisements Email contact link
RSS feeds
Banner ads
Links to
subWebs
Search engine


===== BOOK PAGE 345 =====

CHAPTER 11  •  DEsigning EffECTivE  OuTPuT     345
Graphics. The following list provides details about creating effective graphics for websites:
1. Use one of the most commonly used image formats. PNGs and JPEGs are best for 
photographs, and GIFs are best for artwork images. GIFs are limited to 256 colors but may 
include a transparent background, pixels that allow the background to show through the 
GIF image. GIF images may also be interlaced, meaning that the web browser will show 
the image in successive stages, presenting a clearer image with each stage.
2. Keep the background simple and make sure users can read the text clearly. When 
using a background pattern, make sure that you can see the text clearly on top of it.
3. Create a few professional-looking graphics for use on your pages.
4. Keep graphic images small, and reuse bullets or navigational buttons. Commonly 
used images are stored in a cache, an area on the browsing computer’s hard drive. Once an 
image has been received, it will be taken from the cache whenever it is used again. Using 
cached images improves the speed with which a browser can load a web page.
5. Include tooltip text in a title attribute for image hot spots. Here is an example. If you 
display a map of the United States, each state could be set up as a hot spot. The name of 
the state would appear whenever the user moves the mouse pointer over an image of a 
state. Note that image spots are not as useful for mobile devices because there is no cursor 
that can hover over the image.
6. Examine your website on a variety of displays and screen resolutions as well as on 
smartphones and tablets. Scenes and text that look great on a high-end video display may 
not look good on other devices.
Presentation Style. The following list gives added details about how to design engaging entry 
displays for websites:
1. Provide a home page or landing page that introduces the visitor to the website. The 
page must be designed to load quickly. A useful rule of thumb is to design a page that 
will load in 3 seconds. (Although you may be designing the page on a workstation at the 
university, a visitor to your website may be accessing it from home, using a slower internet 
connection.) This entry display should be 100 kilobytes or less, including all graphics.
Blogs are being written by corporate users for both internal and 
external communication. Blogs are informal and personal, and they 
often invite comments and feedback. They are easy to create and 
update and are designed to change daily. Companies are using blogs 
for advertising and to build social networks for consumers, clients, 
and vendors around their products, building trust and customer 
relationships.
Corporate blogs are monitored out of a sense of responsibility 
for the participants. Guidelines, policies, and laws that shape moni-
toring practices include shared cultural, ethical, and legal values 
such as respecting other employees and customers; not publishing 
any sensitive or secret corporate information or anything protected 
by copyright (without permission); and excluding anything that is 
hateful or profane or that violates anyone’s privacy.
Even with all these guidelines, you still need to ensure that blog 
posts are written in a human voice, not immersed in legal language. 
The latest entry should be at the start of the blog. It should contain 
the following elements:
1. The permalink, or permanent link, specific for the blog post, 
which should never change
2. The headline or title of the post
3. The primary link, which connects the reader to the subject 
under discussion
4. An optional summary, often appearing after the link
5. The blog text or commentary
6. An optional image
7. A block quote containing quotations or other material  
from other sources that contributes to the discussion  
(often indented or in a different font to set it apart from  
the main text)
8. Links for comments by other people
9. Blog software features such as a calendar, search form, and 
other universal features
One highly acclaimed desktop blogging editor for the Mac is 
MarsEdit by Red Sweater. It is compatible with WordPress, 
Micro.blog, Tumblr, and many other blog publishing platforms.
MAC APPEAL  
CREATING BLOGS


===== BOOK PAGE 346 =====

346    PART iv •  THE EssEnTiALs  Of  DEsign
The home page should contain a number of choices, much like a menu. An easy way to 
accomplish that is to design a set of links or buttons and position them on the left side or the top 
of the screen. These can be linked to other pages on the same website.
2. Keep the number of graphics to a reasonable minimum. It takes additional download 
time to transfer a graphics-intensive site.
3. Use large and colorful fonts for headings.
4. Use interesting images and buttons for links. A group of images combined into a single 
image is called an image map, and it contains various hot spots that act as links to other 
pages.
5. Use cascading style sheets to control the formatting and layout of the web page. A CSS 
separates the content (the text and images) from how it looks (the presentation) and stores 
the information in a file external to the web page. One style sheet may control the format-
ting of many pages. Making a change in the style sheet (for example, changing the color of 
bold text) will change the formatting of all the web pages that use the style sheet.
6. Use divisions to enhance a layout. Divisions control the layout by providing blocks of 
text on the web page. Each block may be defined with a position from the top and left of 
the screen or a larger block, and it may have a width and height, as well as border style and 
background color. Divisions eliminate the need for tables within tables and simplify design.
7. Use the same graphics images on several web pages. Consistency will be improved, and 
the pages will load more quickly because the computer stores the image in a cache and 
doesn’t have to load it again.
8. Use JavaScript. JavaScript can be used to tell images to change when a mouse is moved 
and hovers over them, making menus expand and so on. JavaScript can also be used to 
reformat a web page based on the height and width of the screen. If the website is multina-
tional, JavaScript can even detect the language being used (a browser setting) and redirect 
the viewer to a different landing page displaying text in a different language.
9. Avoid overusing animation, sound, and other elements.
Navigation. Is it fun for you to follow links on the web? The answer is most likely that it depends. 
When you discover a website that loads easily, has meaningful links, and allows you to easily 
return to the places you want to go back to, chances are you think it is fun. Fun is not just play; it 
can be an important part of work too. Recent research shows that fun can have a powerful effect 
on making computer training effective.
If, on the other hand, you can’t decide which button or hot spot to click on, and you are afraid 
to choose the wrong one because you might get into the wrong page that takes a long time to load, 
navigation is more painful than fun. An example is visiting a software company’s page to find 
information about the features of the latest version of a product. You have choices such as products, 
download, FAQ, and tech support. Which button will lead to the answers you’re looking for?
Make sure you include a navigation bar and links to the home page on every page of the 
website. A visitor to the site may have found a particular page using a search engine, and it is 
important that the visitor can easily find their way to the home page.
Most important, make sure that users can find what they want quickly: users should be able 
to move from the page they are currently on to the page containing the information they want 
using well-planned, meaningful menu items that provide a mix of cues (Budiu, 2020), including 
those they can get from a link label, the context in which the link is shown, and their previous 
experiences with websites. Use breadcrumbs to help orient the user. Additonally, designers should 
avoid menu labels with odd or branded names.
Rather than urging designers to follow the the three-click rule (that states users should be able 
to move from the page they are currently on to the page containing the information they want in 
only three clicks of a mouse button) to the point of absurdity, and trading off depth of the menu 
for the sake of observing a rigid rule, research (Nielsen & Li, 2017) recommends focusing on 
designing so that users are successful in finding the content they want. One approach is mega-
menus, which are large, two-dimensional panels you can divide into groups showing options for 
navigation.
These options can be further structured through layout, type font design, and even icons. 
Megamenus show everything visible all at one time, which means the user does not have to do 
any scrolling. Users can reveal menu options by hovering, clicking, or tapping on an icon or link.


===== BOOK PAGE 347 =====

CHAPTER 11  •  DEsigning EffECTivE  OuTPuT     347
In order to addess accessibility issues with megamenus, they recommend that designers make 
each top-level menu choice clickable, where it leads to a regular web page that can then present 
all available drop-down options in a fully accessible, HTML version. Examples of websites with 
megamenus for you to explore and use as prototypes include the insurance firm daveramsey.com 
and the fashion and home retailer johnlewis.com.
Promotion. Promote your site. Don’t assume that search engines will find you right away. Submit 
your site every few months to various search engines. Include keywords, called metatags, that 
search engines will use to link search requests to your site. You can find general information 
about metatags at searchenginewatch.com. In addition, you can download free metatag-generating 
software from a variety of sources. If you try to use email to promote your site, others will consider 
it junk email or spam.
Encourage your readers to bookmark your website. If you link to and suggest that they go 
to affiliated websites that feature the “best movie review page in the world” or to the “get music 
for free” website, don’t assume they’ll be coming back to your site in the near future. You will 
encourage them to revisit if they bookmark your site (bookmarks are called “favorites” in some 
browsers). You also may want to design a “favicon,” or favorite icon, so users can identify your 
site in their lists of favorites.
WEB 2.0 TECHNOLOGIES
Of increasing importance for an analyst working on organizational websites is the strategic inclu-
sion of Web 2.0 technologies that focus on enabling and facilitating user-generated content and 
collaboration via the web. Familiar types of technologies you should think about including on both 
public-facing and internal websites you design include blogs, wikis, links to social networks on 
which the company has a presence, and tagging (also called social bookmarking) that provides 
useful pointers to online resources such as websites, content on corporate intranets, corporate 
Seymour continues, “I can tell you what we disliked about the 
reports I worked with. There were too many darn layers, too much 
foliage, or whatever you call it, to go through. Even with a screen 
in front of me, it was like paging through a thick report. What do 
you call that?”
“Menus?” Rosa suggests helpfully. “The main point is that you 
didn’t like having to go through lots of information to get to the 
display you needed.”
Seymour looks happily at Rosa and says, “You’ve got it. I want 
to see more fields on each screen.”
How should Rosa design screen output so that Fields and the 
VP group can get what they want on each screen while observing 
the guidelines for good display design? Remember that the 
group members are busy, and although they wouldn’t be caught 
without their smartphones, they don’t use their desktop systems 
very often. Design a hyperlinked page that would work well in a 
DSS for the vice presidents. What should be included in the first 
display, and what should be stored in hyperlinks? List elements 
for each and explain in a paragraph why you have decided on 
this strategy.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 11.5 
A Field Day
“The thing of it is, I get impatient,” says Seymour Fields, 
owner of a chain of 15 highly successful florist shops/indoor flo-
ral markets called Fields that are located in three Midwestern cit-
ies. “See this thing here?” He taps his computer display irritatedly. 
“We do all the payroll and all the accounting with these things, but  
I don’t use it like I should. I actually feel a little guilty about it. 
See?” he says as he makes a streak on the display with his finger. 
“It’s even got dust on it. I’m a practical person, though. If it’s sitting 
here, taking up space, I want to use it. Or smell it, or at least enjoy 
looking at it, like flowers, right? Or weed it out, that’s what I say. 
The one time I tried something with it, it was a real disaster. Well, 
look, I can show you if I still remember how.” Seymour proceeds to 
try to open an application but can’t seem to get it working.
Rosa Maceta, a systems analyst, has been working on a systems 
project for the entire Fields chain. Part of the original proposal was 
to provide Seymour and their vice presidents with a decision support 
system (DSS) that would help them devise a strategy to determine 
which European markets to visit to set up purchase agreements for 
fresh flowers, which outlets to ship particular kinds of flowers to, 
and how much general merchandise, such as planters, vases, note 
cards, and knickknacks, to stock in each outlet.


===== BOOK PAGE 348 =====

348    PART iv •  THE EssEnTiALs  Of  DEsign
documents, or photos that are relevant to the organization and to users. Notice that Web 2.0 tech-
nologies can be externally faced to clients, customers, vendors, or suppliers or internally faced 
to corporate intranets.
For outward-facing web technologies, the reasons for adding these important collaborative 
tools to organization websites are clear. Companies use collaborative tools to communicate an 
integrated branding and messaging strategy across multiple platforms, to gauge consumer opinion, 
to gather feedback, to create a community of users, and so on. Inward-facing web technologies 
can be useful in building employee relationships, maintaining trust, sharing knowledge, innovating 
among employees and groups of employees, locating corporate resources more readily, and 
nurturing corporate culture and subcultures inside the organization.
Your requirements determination phase informed you about user preferences. As you are 
prototyping, you might also want to add Web 2.0 technologies to internal and external web pages 
if there is a well-thought-out, strategic reason for doing so. Part of your recommended design 
solutions may include adding collaborative tools. From our research and practice with for-profit 
and nonprofit organizations attempting to use Web 2.0 technologies, we have found that there are 
five aspects an analyst should consider:
1. Realize differences between corporate objectives and objectives of key stakeholders. 
There will be differences in why each group values collaborative technologies that you dis-
cover in the outlooks of both groups.
2. Serve as the voice of the customer to your client organization. In recommending the 
inclusion of Web 2.0 technologies for externally facing websites, you need to be able to 
articulate the needs of the customer to the organization.
3. Recognize the importance of visual page design for effectively displaying collaborative 
tools. Whenever users have an expectation of placement of Web 2.0 icons (see Figure 11.17 
for examples) on the web page (for Facebook links, Twitter icons, tagging capability, and 
so forth), you must observe the convention, or at least reinforce the emerging convention. 
Users are getting more accustomed to seeing this array of interactive options displayed in a 
predictable pattern on corporate websites.
4. Revise and update the Web 2.0 technologies offered frequently. Develop a plan (and a  
set of tools) for revising and updating collaborative tools offered on both internal and external 
websites when styles, customs, and tools change.
5. Work to integrate Web 2.0 technologies with the existing branding. Ensure that 
messages are consistent throughout outwardly facing websites and in all public-facing 
communications.
FIGURE 11.17
Many different Web 2.0 sets 
of icons. (Courtesy: Facebook, 
LinkedIn, and Twitter.)
Name of
Icon Set
Social
Networks
Pro Icons
Circular
Social
Media
Free Social
Media Icon
Set
Amazing 3-D
Social Icons
Vintage
Icons for
Bloggers
Designer or
Supplier
Artbees
BlogPerfume.com
Elegant Themes
pinkmoustache.net
Nikola Lazarevic
Facebook
 LinkedIn
 Twitter
RSS Feed


===== BOOK PAGE 349 =====

CHAPTER 11  •  DEsigning EffECTivE  OuTPuT     349
SOCIAL MEDIA DESIGN
Designing output and content for social media has become a career in its own right, but systems 
analysts may be faced with those design tasks as part of their overall information systems design 
work for an organization. Businesses use social media for a number of reasons, including growing 
their audiences (by targeting users within their key demographics), increasing traffic to already 
well-established websites, reinforcing brand awareness, developing an online personal website that 
can be trusted, and so on. Many fun, interactive activities can be added to social media posts such 
as games, contests, competitions, rewards, or point or badge prizes that engage, incentivize, and 
reward users for taking an action (going through their Pinterest account to pin a shirt purchased 
from Amazon to Pinterest, for example).
Your clients have numerous options to consider for posting content or advertisements that can 
make an impact on customers: Facebook, Instagram (via the company’s Facebook Advertising), 
Twitter (your client will need to sign up for Twitter Advertising), Snapchat, YouTube, LinkedIn, 
Pinterest, and many others based in other countries. Although social platforms share some simi-
larities, they also have some differences. On Snapchat, for instance, videos and photos disappear 
once they are viewed, whereas Twitter reuses the main profile picture and username every time 
the Twitter account is accessed. Carefully craft initial selections for these sites, and refresh with 
new pictures or other images as warranted.
Designing content for social media is highly visual, and visual content is 40 times more likely 
to be shared on social media. Sharing is at the core of what allows a designer of social media to 
leverage social media for its best networking aspects. Although designing for social media is built 
on many of the same principles as designing for intranet business pages or for corporate web-
sites, the emphasis shifts from clarity of writing and orderly design to an emphasis on the visual. 
Specialized imaging tools such as Canva, Pablo by Buffer, Adobe Creative Cloud Express, and 
Desygner are easy to use and enhance visual design of social media content.
Guidelines for Social Media Design
In the following section we consider four aspects of designing for social media: (1) emphasizing 
the goal of the design, (2) developing a consistent look, (3) creating appealing design flow, and 
(4) simplifying to use space in a positive way.
Emphasizing the Goal of the Design. Always keep in mind the most important goal of the con-
tent to be conveyed. Is it to invite participation? Is it to engage first-time customers with a new 
company? Is it to remind an established customer of upcoming events? Is it to underscore the 
presence of the corporation on social media in addition to their web presence? Examine what is 
driving creation of this content. Keep focusing on what must be included and eliminate second- 
and third-priority social media content, which should be developed on more extended platforms 
such as websites or in videos.
Developing a Consistent Look. Incorporate key design elements such as corporate logos or 
trademarks in every posting on social media. Continue using the organization’s established color 
palette (for example, use green, brown, and blue for an organic food company as visual cues of 
the freshness of organic food grown outdoors), and carefully consider the story you tell in your 
designs for a company that provides luxury services or goods (black and gold are traditional 
invocations of lavish goods and would be good color choices).
Color choice can help the audience understand the story you are trying to tell; critical elements 
in the story can be keyed to certain colors to increase their impact on the audience. Appropriate 
color choices can be found using design tools with predesigned complementary palletes or by 
examining a color wheel.
When beginning a new design, make sure the color choices reflect the organization’s purpose 
and harmonize with their corporate logo. As with other types of screen and form design, limit the  
number of typefaces on postings to about three. Using too many typefaces risks distracting 
the audience with clutter and losing the story line.
Creating Appealing Design Flow. Lay out the design in a deliberate way so that it flows well when 
the user views it. The upper left side of the screen and the left side are highly noticeable places 
for important information to appear on social media. For those familiar with the English alphabet,


===== BOOK PAGE 350 =====

350    PART iv •  THE EssEnTiALs  Of  DEsign
visualize elements for the design as being mapped out in an “E” pattern, an “F” pattern, or a “Z” 
pattern. In reading English text, our eyes follow those patterns, so key visual elements are best 
placed there. These layouts work well for social media and will garner attention for the business, 
keeping people on the posting or advertisement longer than will other designs.
Simplifying to Use Space in a Positive Way. Understanding the concept of simplifying designs 
for social media is sometimes a difficult one to convey because it dwells on the idea that “less is 
more.” Positive space is like a “rest” in a musical score. A rest is a silent pause in the music, and 
the score symbolically shows how long the musician must pause before the music resumes. A rest 
contrasts with the sound of the note, but it is crucial to a coherent sound. A useful way to approach 
using positive space is to design a content posting, then ask yourself “What can be eliminated?” 
Oftentimes you can delete an extraneous element—an extra object, an extra color—or resize an 
element and use the positive space to set off important objects in an eye-catching way.
Eventually, one goal in developing a strategy for addressing evolving user standards and 
conventions is to use text analytics (TA) software to interpret the qualitative data captured in 
customer responses to blogs, wikis, and through other social media. Indeed, this is an approach you 
can recommend to your client organization as you close the feedback loop created by establishing 
Web 2.0 technologies for consumers and employees.
DESIGNING APPS FOR SMARTPHONES AND TABLETS
As smartphones and tablets become more powerful and ubiquitous in organizations, systems ana-
lysts will need to conceptualize their software as apps. In the early days of computing, software 
was called a “program.” Apple preferred the term “application.” When software was designed for 
the iPhone and iPad, software was simply called an “app.” The word app became mainstream 
with the widespread adoption of iPhones and iPads that can run these small programs. Apple sells 
apps on iTunes much the same way it sells music. You can download an app and install it on your 
iPhone or iPad.
Creating an app for a mobile phone or a larger device such as the iPad involves brainstorming, 
imagining, preliminary screen design, user interface decisions, and detailed screen design. Many 
designers like to work in Adobe Illustrator, but others prefer Adobe Photoshop. But before 
attempting to use one of these packages, a large whiteboard with a marker can be the very best 
way to begin designing an app. Later in this chapter we examine apps that are used to create 
mockups, the preferred name for smartphone and tablet prototypes.
An analyst who develops apps is trying to fill or to create a user need in a unique way. The 
motivation for creating the app often arises from the developer, and usually not from formal 
requirements analysis performed for an organization. However, numerous approaches and tools 
used for display and web design apply to app development as well as to larger systems projects.
In this section, we focus on designing for the small screens of smartphones and tablets. It is 
interesting to note, however, that Apple requires developers to send in a 512 × 512-pixel icon for 
the App Store. Requirements for the original Macintosh computer only necessitated a 512 × 342-
pixel display, so output design for smartphones and tablets must be taken seriously.
Throughout this section, we discuss concepts useful in any operating system, whether for 
Apple, Android, or Microsoft. We use examples from Apple’s iPad and iPhone, however, because 
they are currently the dominant devices of tablets and smartphones.
In designing apps for the small screens of smartphones and tablets, follow these steps:
1. Set up a developer account.
2. Choose a development process.
3. Be original.
4. Determine how you will price the app.
5. Follow the rules for output design.
6. Design your icon.
7. Choose an appropriate name for the app.
8. Design for a variety of devices.
9. Design the output for the app.
10. Design the output a second time for different orientation.


===== BOOK PAGE 351 =====

CHAPTER 11  •  DEsigning EffECTivE  OuTPuT     351
11. Share a prototype of your work.
12. Design the logic.
13. Design movement.
14. Create the user interface using gestures.
15. Protect your intellectual property.
16. Market your app.
We concentrate on the steps that are design oriented in this chapter.
Set Up a Developer Account
Apple has software developer accounts for individuals or an enterprise. Apple insists on approving 
every app sold in its App Store. This means there are some restrictions that frustrate software 
developers and, sometimes, consumers. Here’s where the walled garden comes in (in this case 
the metaphor refers to an array of preapproved apps that are closed to outside developers). You 
won’t find any app with objectionable content in the App Store, and you won’t find a great app 
that lets you reprogram the mute button on your iPhone to function as a camera shutter either. 
Android has a more open platform, and many developers have taken advantage of developing apps 
in open source communities.
Choose a Development Process
Unless you are developing a specialized app that will cost more than $19.95, prototyping is most 
likely the best way to develop your app. Quick releases are important, and there is a strong advan-
tage to being the first to introduce a certain type of app. You can draw on many of the principles 
and values of agile development in designing an app.
Quality should not be sacrificed, but it is possible to introduce an app and then add features 
in subsequent releases. Numerous app developers have adopted this strategy, and it has a number 
of advantages. It allows you to gain an advantage by being the first to introduce a specific app. It 
also allows you to revise the app adding new features, and users approve wholeheartedly when 
improvements are made. In addition, it increases visibility because the app appears on a list of 
apps that have been updated.
Be Original
Never copy other developers’ software. Doing so is illegal and unethical. Make sure your app 
has different functionality and looks very different from other apps on the market. Observe all 
licensing restrictions.
This may seem obvious, but some developers don’t realize that you can’t use Apple trade-
marks in your app. You should avoid using words like iPad  and iPhone  in your app, and even 
avoid the name Apple, for that matter.
Determine How You Will Price the App
The pricing decision you make will affect the design of the app. If your app will contain adver -
tising, the ads will take up valuable space on your screen and may distract users. If you adopt a 
pricing strategy that allows upgrading of features, you need to consider the interface that asks the 
user to upgrade.
There are six basic options for pricing:
1. Choose a low-cost strategy. Taking into consideration free and freemium apps and apps 
offered in the Apple App Store, the average price of apps is around $1.00 and the average 
price of games is $0.49. A very large number of iPhone apps are $0.99. For the iPad, $1.99 
rather than $0.99 is the standard. If you decide to offer a low-cost app, you’ll have plenty 
of company.
2. Introduce an app as a “premium” app. Premium apps cost $19.95 and up. These apps 
are intended for professionals and are often iPad versions of desktop software. Omni 
Group offers a suite of apps that accomplish much of the functionality of Mac apps. If 
you price your app this way, you will have fewer users adopting the app, but they will 
be serious users. They will demand that you add features and functionality and provide 
adequate support.


===== BOOK PAGE 352 =====

352    PART iv •  THE EssEnTiALs  Of  DEsign
The Hot Apps Factory team introduced an app for developing apps as version .983 
with an introductory price of $19.95. They are planning to add six additional features and 
incrementally increase the price by $5.00 every time a feature is added. Version 2.0 will be 
priced as a monthly subscription for $10-$200 a month depending on chosen features. 
3. Adopt a “freemium” model. Apps that are offered at no cost for basic features but allow 
in-app purchases for premium features and functionality are called freemium apps. In 
the early days of app development, there was somewhat of a backlash to this approach, 
as many users feel they were forced to pay for each feature separately, but now it is more 
common. Consider all options before choosing this business model.
4. Offer an app for free. Sometimes it is advisable to offer an app at no charge to the user. 
If you are the nth person to write an app for this situation, that may be the only way to get 
users to adopt your app. It may be useful if you have other apps for sale. Adopters may 
appreciate your work and buy something else you have developed.
5. Promote an app by reducing its price. A mixed strategy is sometimes best. Occasionally 
you can reduce the price of an app for a short period of time or even offer it for free. Apple 
iTunes features an app of the week, although it is not free. However, other sites feature 
daily free offerings. Ideally you want to be on one of Apple’s top lists and offering an app 
for free might accomplish this.
6. Accept advertising. If you have a very useful app that is open much of the time (a weather 
app, a stock market app, or even a popular game, for example), it might be advantageous to 
have a free app with advertising. If you read the comments of users about a certain weather 
app on the App Store pages, you will notice that customers keep asking for an ad-free 
option. Use advertising cautiously.
Follow the Rules
Follow the design rules set forth by the developer of the operating system. Apple rejects many apps 
designed for Apple’s iOS because they violate the Human Interface Guidelines (HIG). Interfaces 
are discussed in detail in Chapter 14.
Design Your Icon
On a smartphone or tablet, the icon is just as important as the app name. Try to design a simple, 
easily identifiable, and easy-to-remember icon. Figure 11.18 shows an example from App Cooker, 
developed by Hot Apps Factory. It allows you to see how your icon will look in various different 
formats.
FIGURE 11.18
App Cooker (by Hot Apps 
Factory) allows a designer to 
see how an app icon will appear 
in its many forms. (Screenshot 
from App Cooker application. 
Copyright © 2011 by Hot Apps 
Factory SARL. Reprinted with 
permission.)


===== BOOK PAGE 353 =====

CHAPTER 11  •  DEsigning EffECTivE  OuTPuT     353
Choose an Appropriate Name for the App
Keep your app name to 12 or fewer characters. It will appear under the icon on the home screen, 
and if it is longer than 12 letters, some letters will be dropped when the icon is displayed on 
a screen.
Design for a Variety of Devices
Even staying within Apple’s set of iPads and iPhones may mean that you need to design apps 
that are flexible. Some of the differences among displays are shown in Figure 11.19. You need to 
supply Apple with a number of different icon sizes, so take that into consideration when you are 
developing an icon. Icons will look different from one device to another if they are too complex. 
Simplicity is a virtue when designing icons.
You should create icons in a vector-based graphic application such as Adobe Illustrator. If 
you use vector-based graphics, you can scale your icons rather than create bitmap images in many 
different sizes. Start with a 1024 × 1024 design, and you can shrink the graphic to smaller sizes. 
If you create a 1024 × 1024 design, it will print as a 3.5 × 3.5-inch item at the 300 dots per inch 
resolution needed for magazines.
Design the Output for the App
Although it is possible to use Adobe Illustrator, Visio (on the PC), or OmniGraffle (on a Mac), you 
might consider using one of the many apps designed specifically for creating apps on handheld 
devices. Some apps especially useful for designing for Apple iPhones and iPads are AppCraftHD, 
iMockups, and App Cooker.
Figure 11.20 shows how the App Cooker app allows a designer to pick from a series of wid-
gets. This app, as well as many others, provides templates for iPhones and iPads so a designer 
can plan precisely what will appear on the screen when the app is running. The principles for 
designing smartphone and tablet screens are similar to the ones mentioned earlier in the chapter.
Design the Output a Second Time for a Different Orientation
Once you have designed all the screens for an app, you should do it again, but this time turn the 
devices 90 degrees. If you designed the app in landscape mode, turn the device and design it in 
portrait mode.
FIGURE 11.19
Apple smartphones and tablets 
come in different sizes.
Icon Required
Display size
Application
icon (Home
screen icon)
App icon for
the app store
Launch image
Spotlight
search icon
Settings icon
Documents
icon
Size for Older
iPhones in
(pixels)
320 × 480
57 × 57
512 × 512
320 × 480
29 × 29
29 × 29
22 × 29
Size for High-
Resolution
iPhone (pixels)
640 × 1136
114 × 114
1024 × 1024
recommended 
640 × 960
58 × 58
58 × 58
44 × 58
Size for Older
iPad (pixels)
1024 × 768
72 × 72
512 × 512
768 × 1004 and
1024 × 748 
50 × 50
29 × 29
64 × 64 and
320 × 320
Size for High-
Resolution iPad
(pixels)
2048 × 1536
144 × 144 
1024 × 1024
recommended 
1536 × 2008 and
2048 × 1496 
100 × 100
58 × 58
128 × 128 and
640 × 640


===== BOOK PAGE 354 =====

354    PART iv •  THE EssEnTiALs  Of  DEsign
Let’s face it. Some apps look better in one mode than another. If you read a full page of text 
on a smartphone in a browser such as Safari, you may be familiar with looking at it in portrait 
mode. On a tablet, however, the text may appear to look better in landscape mode, even if the 
number of words is exactly the same.
When text is justified, the gaps between words seem to be larger in portrait mode, making it 
more difficult to read. On a device such as Kindle, changing the orientation changes the num-
ber of words on a page and also changes the column structure. Users like to choose their screen 
orientation.
Developers can use different orientations to their advantage. In portrait mode, a calculator 
app can present a very simple calculator, but putting it in landscape mode may transform it into a 
powerful scientific calculator. Giving this easy option to a customer is usually welcomed.
Share a Prototype of Your Work
Before you begin coding, take the opportunity to get valuable feedback from friends, potential 
users, and even fellow developers. Apps such as AppTaster allow you to test your app designs by 
sharing your prototypes created in App Cooker.
Design the App’s Logic
Tablets and smartphones fit in well with the prototyping method of development, but sometimes 
the best way to approach an app is to sketch out the logic using some of the principles used in 
creating process specifications and diagramming structured decisions (discussed in Chapter 9).
Design Movement
How you move from screen to screen may make a big difference in a user’s experience. Don’t 
leave movement to chance. Plan movement carefully and use storyboards or an app such as App 
Cooker to plan how an app navigates from one screen to another, as shown in Figure 11.21.
Create the User Interface Using Gestures
Smartphones and tablets have innovative user interfaces (technically called touchscreen capaci-
tive sensing), and you need to design your apps assuming that users will demand touch-sensitive 
interfaces that use gestures such as swipes, pinches, tugs, and shakes. Users will expect different 
types of feedback and will demand the ability to opt out of some of the features.
Gestures and feedback for tablets and smartphones are discussed in greater detail in 
Chapter 14, in the context of human–computer interaction, providing user feedback, and usability.
FIGURE 11.20
The mockup app App Cooker has 
a toolbox of widgets you can use 
to design a screen. (From App 
Cooker application. Copyright © 
2011 by Hot Apps Factory SARL. 
Reprinted with permission.)


===== BOOK PAGE 355 =====

CHAPTER 11  •  DEsigning EffECTivE  OuTPuT     355
Protect Your Intellectual Property
If you put the effort into design, you need to protect it. Trademark your icons and logos. Recently 
competitors have introduced apps with one-off logos or icons very similar to already popular ones. 
You might also want to copyright your app. Doing so is not very expensive.
You are also advised to create your own end user license agreement (EULA). Your EULA 
gives others the right to use your app and limits what a user can do with the app.
When you write a EULA, consider including a warranty disclaimer. Some users will not like 
an app and will want a refund. This is often unreasonable, especially when a user may have paid 
only 99 cents to buy the app. Still, users’ expectations are not always aligned with yours, so protect 
yourself. Apple has a default EULA, but our advice is to consider a custom EULA.
The smartphone and tablet markets are constantly evolving. New operating systems will 
change the way apps are designed in the future.
Market Your App
If you are fortunate enough to get a potential user to visit your app’s product page, you need to 
convince the person to pay for and download your app. Pay attention to the content on Apple’s 
App Store, which is divided into many sections. To market your app, you will need a large icon, 
a description, a section explaining what is new in the current version, and a sample set of screen 
shots. The screen shots selected are very important. All this is mentioned here because good app 
design is essential to putting your best face forward.
There are many other ways to market your app, but that discussion is beyond the scope of 
this book. There are many books and websites devoted to marketing apps.
OUTPUT PRODUCTION AND XML
Output production varies depending on the platform used. There are many different ways to 
create output, ranging from database software such as Microsoft Access, to statistical packages 
such as SAS, to document creators such as Adobe Acrobat. Figure 11.22 illustrates the 
transformation process.
One of the advantages of using hypertext markup language (XML; see Chapter 8) is that an 
XML document can be transformed into different output media types. This is done using CSSs or 
extensible stylesheet language transformations (XSLT). These methods reinforce the idea that 
data can be defined once and used many times in different formats.
FIGURE 11.21
App Cooker allows you to plan 
how an app goes from one screen 
to the next. (From App Cooker 
application. Copyright © 2011 
by Hot Apps Factory SARL. 
Reprinted with permission.)


===== BOOK PAGE 356 =====

356    PART iv •  THE EssEnTiALs  Of  DEsign
Using CSSs is an easy way to transform an XML document. A style sheet provides a series 
of styles, such as font family, size, color, border, and so on, that are linked to the elements of the 
XML document. These styles may vary for different media, such as a screen, printed output, or 
a handheld device. The transforming software detects the type of device and applies the correct 
styles to control the output.
For example, a style used for a flat-panel display might use a rich palette of colors and a sans 
serif font, which is easier to read on a screen. A different style using a serif font and black or gray 
color may be used to define a printed report for the same data. A smaller font size might be used 
for a handheld device or mobile phone.
The drawback of using CSSs is that it does not allow an analyst to manipulate the data, such 
as rearranging the order of the elements or sorting, and only a limited amount of identifying text, 
such as captions, may be added. CSS is basically used for formatting.
Extensible stylesheet language transformations (XSLT) is a more powerful means of trans-
forming an XML document. XSLT allows an analyst to select the elements and insert them into 
a web page or another output medium. XSLT is not a programming language but uses a series of 
statements to define which elements should be output, the sort sequence, the selection of data, 
and so on. An example of an XML transformation is illustrated in Figure 11.23. The XML is 
shown on the left, and the result of the transformation is shown on the right. Notice that only the 
data between the tags (contained in less than [<] and greater than [>] symbols) are included in 
the output.
Ajax
Ajax is a technique that uses both JavaScript and XML to obtain small amounts of data, either 
plain text or XML, from a server without leaving the web page. This is a big advantage because 
it means that the entire web page does not need to be reloaded. It works by allowing the web 
page to reformat itself based on choices that a user inputs. Ajax is also related to user input; see 
additional details in Chapter 12.
Ajax is discussed here because the output implications are important as well. It is up to 
analysts and designers to determine when data should be added or changed on a web page and 
to identify the conditions that cause the change. The order in which the questions are asked plays 
into this design as well.
FIGURE 11.22
Extensible stylesheet language 
transformations software can be 
used to make XML documents and 
transform them into many different 
formats for a variety of platforms. 
(Image courtsey-Desktop 
Computer: Pixelliebe/123RF). 
(Image courtsey-Smartphone-
Lembergvector/123RF).
<?xml version=“1.0”?>
  <customers >
    <name>
    <phone>
 <customers>
Paper Output
New XML Document
XML Document
Smartphone
Web Page
<?xml version=“1.0”?>
  <customers >
    <name>
    <phone>
 <customers>
Desktop


===== BOOK PAGE 357 =====

CHAPTER 11  •  DEsigning EffECTivE  OuTPuT     357
An example of a web page using Ajax is shown in Figure 11.24, which demonstrates that Ajax 
makes it possible to display much less data on a page, thereby making the output less cluttered 
and less confusing. In this example, the user entered one of four ways to narrow down the search 
to view a list of current customers. The options the user had available were (1) enter the first three 
digits of a zip code (postal code), (2) enter a telephone area code, (3) select a state, or (4) select 
a country. The user may not know the postal code or area code and may therefore need to search 
by state or country, so the options are very useful.
After entering one of the location choices—in this case, the first three digits of the postal 
code—the user clicked on the Get Customers button. The value of the postal code is sent to the 
server, along with data indicating that it was a postal code. The server then finds all customer 
records for the selected location, creates an XML document, and sends it to the same web page.
When designing output, a systems analyst has many different options regarding how to 
display data on the web page. In this case, the analyst specified that the XML document would be 
used to create a drop-down list containing all current customers for the desired location. Once a 
user selects a customer from the drop-down list, more information about the particular customer 
is displayed, as shown in the example.
The advantage of using Ajax for displaying data is that the user does not have to wait for 
a new web page to display after making a selection. The Ajax philosophy is to display limited 
questions for the user to answer on an incremental basis. This eliminates screen clutter. Once the 
user responds to a question by making a choice, a new question may be generated.
FIGURE 11.23
An XML transformation, with 
XML on the left and the result of 
the transformation on the right. 
Only data between the tags are 
included in the output on the right.
<?xml version=“1.0” standalone=“no”? >
<?xml–stylesheet type=“text/xsl” href=“cust02.xsl” ?>
<customers>
    <title>Customer Information</title>
    <customer>
     <number>09288</number>
  <name>
   <lastname> Green </lastname>
   <ﬁrst name> George </ﬁrst name>
   <middle_initial>L</middle_initial>
  </name>
  <address>
   <street> 123 Oak Street</street>
   <apartment> Suite 16</apartment>
   <city>Madison</city>
   <state> WI</state>
   <zip> 53704</zip>
   <country>United States</country>
  </address>
  <current_balance>123.45</current_balance>
    </customer>
    <customer>
     <number>15008</number>
  <name>
   <lastname> Brown</lastname>
   <ﬁrst name> Sally</ﬁrst name>
   <middle_initial>S</middle_initial>
  </name>
  <address>
   <street> 123 Elm Street</street>
   <apartment> Apt. 1</apartment>
   <city>Camden</city>
   <state> NJ</state>
   <zip> 08102</zip>
   <country>United States</country>
  </address>
  <current_balance>9,876.54</current_balance>
    </customer>
</customers>
Customer Information
Number:
First Name:
Last Name:
Street:
Apartment:
City:
State:
Zip:
Country:
Current Balance:
09288
George
Green
123 Oak Street
Suite 16
Madison
WI
53704
United States
123.45
Number:
First Name:
Last Name:
Street:
Apartment:
City:
State:
Zip:
Country:
Current Balance:
15008
Sally
Brown
123 Elm Street
Apt. 1
Camden
NJ
08102
United States
9,876.54


===== BOOK PAGE 358 =====

358    PART iv •  THE EssEnTiALs  Of  DEsign
Summary
Output is any useful information or data delivered to the user by the information system, decision support 
system, the web, or smartphones or tablets. Output can take virtually any form, including print, computer, 
smartphone, and tablet displays, audio, microforms, social media posts and content, and web-based documents.
A systems analyst has six main objectives in designing output: to serve the intended human and organi-
zation purpose, to fit the user, to deliver the right quantity of output, to deliver it to the right place, to provide 
output on time, and to choose the right output method.
Analysts should recognize that output content is related to output method. Output of different technolo-
gies affects users in different ways. Output technologies also differ in their speed, cost, portability, flexibility, 
accessibility, storage, and retrieval possibilities. All these factors must be considered when deciding among 
output options.
The presentation of output can bias users in their interpretation of it. Analysts and users must be 
aware of the sources of bias. Analysts should interact with users to design and customize output, inform users 
of the possibilities of bias in output, create flexible and modifiable output, and train users to use multiple 
outputs to help verify the accuracy of any particular report.
Designing output for user displays is important, especially for dashboards, decision support systems, 
the web, and smartphones and tablets. Responsive web design means that a website is developed so that it 
can be viewed on any device: a desktop, tablet, or smartphone. Recently designers have moved away from 
3-D, realistic designs (skeuomorphic design) to flat web design, which is a clean, two-dimensional design 
using bright colors.
Data visualization is the representation of data in the form of a chart, diagram, map, or other visual. It 
is used to make complex data understandable. For many people, seeing data displayed in a chart or map is 
easier to comprehend than if the same data were displayed in a table. Commercial data visualization packages 
are available. Some advantages of using data visualization are using viewing data in a better way, identifying 
trends and patterns, seeing more than one attribute at a time, quickly making decisions, and communicating 
information to others in a more effective manner.
Web 2.0 technologies (including social media) should be incorporated in both public-facing and internal 
web pages to permit user communication and collaboration. The analyst has several goals in designing social 
media output and content. They include emphasizing the goal of the design, developing a consistent look, 
creating an appealing design flow, and simplifying the design to use space in a positive way.
Aesthetics and usefulness are critical when creating well-designed output for displays. It is important 
to produce prototypes of screens and web documents that encourage users to interact with them and make 
changes where desired.
Developing applications, or “apps,” that are fun or useful for smartphones and tablets has its own distinct 
development process, but many aspects of agile development, such as quick releases or limited features, 
as well as prototyping, can be extended to app development. App designers who design apps for market-
dominant Apple smartphones and tablets should consider pricing options for apps, developing apps for 
FIGURE 11.24
A web page using Ajax makes it 
possible to display much less data 
on a page, allowing an uncluttered 
display.


===== BOOK PAGE 359 =====

CHAPTER 11  •  DEsigning EffECTivE  OuTPuT     359
specific user gestures, designing for different screen orientations on different devices, and legally protecting 
the intellectual property they create.
Review Questions
1. List six objectives an analyst pursues in designing system output.
2. Contrast external outputs with internal outputs produced by a system. Remember to consider the 
differences between external and internal users.
3. List potential electronic output methods for users.
4. What are the drawbacks of electronic and web-based output?
5. List 10 factors that must be considered when choosing output technology.
6. What output type is best if frequent updates are necessary?
7. What kind of output is desirable if many readers will be reading, storing, and reviewing output over a 
period of years?
8. What are two of the drawbacks of audio output?
9. List three main ways in which presentations of output are unintentionally biased.
10. What are five ways an analyst can avoid biasing output?
11. Why is it important to show users a prototype output report or display?
12. List three categories of printed reports.
13. Give one difference between exception and summary reports.
14. In what ways do displays, printed output, and web-based documents differ?
15. List four guidelines to facilitate the design of good display output.
16. What differentiates output for a decision support system from that of a more traditional management 
information system that sends predetermined reports to decision makers?
17. What are the four primary considerations of an analyst in designing graphical output for a DSS?
18. Define stickiness.
19. List seven guidelines for creating good websites.
20. Define the term responsive web design.
21. Compare the difference between skeuomorphic design and flat web design.
22. List five guidelines for using graphics in designing websites.
23. List seven ideas for improving the presentation of corporate websites that you design.
24. What is the “three-clicks” rule? How stringently should it be followed?
25. What are megamenus for website navigation?
26. In what ways can you encourage companies to promote their websites that you have developed?
27. What is data visualization?
28. What are five of the many advantages for using data visualizations?
29. What are four “dos” for using visualization in your output designs?
30. What are four “don’ts” for using visualization in your output designs?
31. What are Web 2.0 technologies? List four of the many in existence.
Keywords and Phrases
app
Ajax
audio output
blog
bookmark
browser
cascading style sheets (CSS)
dashboard
data visualization
electronic output
email
end user license agreement (EULA)
extensible stylesheet language transformations 
(XSLT)
flat web design
general public license (GPL)
gestures
green IT
infographics
megamenu
metatags
mockups
orientation
output bias
output design
responsive web design
RSS feeds
skeuomorphic design
social media
stickiness
storyboarding
walled garden
Web 2.0 technologies
web page
wiki
wireframing


===== BOOK PAGE 360 =====

360    PART iv •  THE EssEnTiALs  Of  DEsign
32. List the five factors analysts should consider when including Web 2.0 technologies in organization 
web pages.
33. List the four guidelines for designing output and content for social media.
34. What is another word for app?
35. List 8 of the 16 app development steps that deal with design.
36. List two programs that can help you design output for a smartphone or tablet app.
37. What principles of agile development apply to developing an app?
38. Why is it important to design an app for different orientations (portrait and landscape)?
39. List the six basic options for pricing an app you develop.
40. What are gestures in designing smartphones and tablets?
41. What are three ways to protect your app as intellectual property?
42. How do CSSs allow an analyst to produce output?
43. What are the advantages of using XSLT instead of CSSs?
44. What are RSS feeds?
45. What are the main uses for dashboards?
46. What are infographics?
47. How do CSSs allow an analyst to produce output?
48. How does Ajax help to build effective web pages?
Problems
1. “I’m sure they won’t mind if we start sending them the report on these oversized computer sheets. All 
this time, we’ve been condensing it, retyping it, and sending it to our biggest accounts, but we just 
can’t now. We’re so understaffed, we don’t have the time,” says Ada Aliyu. “I’ll just write a comment 
here telling them how to respond to this report, and then we can send it out.”
a. What potential problems do you see in casually changing external output? List them.
b. Discuss in a paragraph how internal and external output can differ in appearance and function.
2. “I don’t need to see it very often, but when I do, I have to be able to get at it quickly. I think we 
lost the last contract because the information I needed was buried in a stack of paper on someone’s 
desk somewhere,” says Hadiza Hussein, an architect describing the company’s problems to one of 
the analysts assigned to the new systems project. “What I need is instant information about how 
much a building of that square footage cost the last time we bid it; what the basic materials such as 
steel, glass, and concrete now cost from our three top suppliers; who our likely competition on this 
type of building might be; and who comprises the committee that will be making the final decision 
on who gets the bid. Right now, though, it’s in a hundred reports somewhere. I have to look all over 
for it.”
a. Given the limited details you have here, write a paragraph to suggest an output method for Hadi-
za’s use that will solve some of her current problems. In a second paragraph, explain your reasons 
for choosing the output method you did. (Hint: Be sure to relate output method to output content 
in your answer.)
b. Hadiza’s current thinking is that no paper record of the output discussed need be kept. In a para-
graph, discuss what factors should be weighed before displayed output is used to the exclusion of 
printed reports.
c. Make a list of five to seven questions concerning the output’s function in the organization that you 
would ask Hadiza and others before deciding to do away with any printed reports currently being 
used.
3. Here are several situations calling for decisions about output content, output methodology, distribu-
tion, and so on. For each situation, note the appropriate output decision.
a. A large, well-regarded supplier of key raw materials to your company’s production process 
requires a year-end summary report of totals purchased from it.
b. Internal brainstorming memos are circulated through the staff regarding plans for a company 
picnic and fundraiser.
c. A summary report of the company’s financial situation is needed by a key decision maker, who 
will use it when presenting a proposal to potential external backers.
d. A listing of the current night’s hotel room reservations is needed for front desk personnel.
e. A listing of the current night’s hotel room reservations is needed by the local police.
f. A real-time count of people passing through the gates of Wallaby World (an Australian theme 
park) will be used by parking lot patrols.
g. An inventory system must register an item each time it has been scanned by a wand.
h. A summary report of merit pay increases allotted to each of 120 employees will be used by  
22 supervisors during a joint supervisors’ meeting, and subsequently when explaining merit  
pay increases to the supervisors’ own department employees.


===== BOOK PAGE 361 =====

CHAPTER 11  •  DEsigning EffECTivE  OuTPuT     361
i. Competitive information is needed by three strategic planners in the organization, but it is 
industrially sensitive if widely distributed.
j. A casual style of conversation is needed to inform customers about powerful but seldom-used 
features of a product.
k. A historic district of a city wants to let visitors know about historical buildings and events.
l. Storm warnings must be delivered to app subscribers in a large geographical area.
m. An executive wants to see many statistics and metrics on one display.
n. Users want to see website output in bright colors, without shading.
o. A company wants to update users with highly visual data, refreshing at appropriate intervals 
during a football game.
4. “I think I see now where that guy was coming from, but he had me going for a minute there,” says 
Missy deLimit. She is discussing a prototype of display output designed by the systems analyst that 
she has just seen. “I mean, I never considered it a problem before if even as much as 20 percent of the 
total class size couldn’t be fit into a class,” she says. “We know our classes are in demand, and because 
we can’t hire more faculty to cover the areas we need, the adjustment has to come in the student 
demand. He’s got it highlighted as a problem if only 5 percent of the students who want a class can’t 
get in, but that’s okay. Now that I know what he means, I’ll just ignore it when the computer beeps.”
a. In a sentence or two, describe the problem Missy deLimit is experiencing with the display output.
b. Is her solution to “ignore the beeps” a reasonable one given that output is in the prototype stage?
c. In a paragraph, explain how the display output for this particular problem can be changed so that it 
better reflects the rules of the system Missy deLimit is using.
5. Following is a log sheet for a patient information system used by nurses at a convalescent home to 
record patient visitors and activities during their shifts. Design a printed report using form design 
software that provides a summary for the charge nurse of each shift and a report for the activities 
coordinator at the end of a week. Be sure to observe all the conventions for good report design.  
These reports will be used to determine staffing patterns and future activities offerings.
Date Patient Visitors Relationship Activities
2/14 Li 2 Mother, father Walked about halls, meditated, meals 
in cafeteria, used social media
Zhang 6 Coworkers Played games, party in room
Ali 0 — Meals in room, used social media
Devi 4 Husband and friends Games in sunroom, watched TV , used 
social media
Yang 2 Parents Conversation, meals in cafeteria
Abdullahi 1 Sister Conversation, crafts room, used email 
on one of the home’s computers
Melnyk 2 Sister, brother Conversation, games out of room, 
whirlpool, used email on one of the 
home’s computers
6. Design display output for Problem 5 using form design software. Make any assumptions about sys-
tem capability necessary and follow display design conventions for onscreen instructions. (Hint: You 
can use more than one display screen if you wish.)
a. In a paragraph, discuss why you designed each report as you did in this problem and Problem 5. 
What are the major differences in your approach to each one? Can the printed reports be success-
fully transplanted to displays without changes? Why or why not?
b. Some of the nurses are interested in a web-based system that patients’ families can access from 
home with a password. Design an output screen for the web. Make use of a megamenu. In a para-
graph, describe how your report had to be altered so that it could be viewed by one patient’s family.
c. Several family members are on social media and would like a quick way to use Facebook or 
other social media to check on the daily activities participated in by their relatives. Design an 
infographic that could be shared on Facebook or other social media that captures key information 
about the patient for the family by the convalescent home staff.
7. Mandhana manufactures uniforms for police departments worldwide. Its uniforms are chosen by 
many groups because of their low cost and simple but dignified design. You are helping to design 
a dashboard for Mandhana’s decision makers, and it has asked for tabular output that will help it 
in making various decisions about what designers to use, where to market its uniforms, and what 
changes to make to uniforms to keep them looking up to date. The following table lists some of the 
data the company would like to see in tables, including uniform style names, an example of a buyer 
group for each style, and which designers design which uniform styles. Prepare an example of tabular 
output for display that incorporates these data about Mandhana’s. Follow proper conventions for 
tabular output displays. Use codes and a key, where appropriate.


===== BOOK PAGE 362 =====

362    PART iv •  THE EssEnTiALs  Of  DEsign
Style Name Example of Buyer Designers
Full military NYPD Chen, Ahmed, Melvin Mine
Half military LAPD Ahmed, Calvetti, Sun, Melvin Mine
Formal dress Australian Armed Forces Chen, Jallow, Melvin Mine
Casual dress “Miami Vice” Bondar, Melvin Mine
8. Mandhana’s is interested in graphical output for its DSS. It wants to see a graphical comparison of 
how many of each style of uniform are being sold each year.
a. Choose an appropriate graph style and design an infographic that incorporates the following data:
Full Military (percent of total) Half Military Formal Dress Casual Dress
2018 50 20 20 10
2019 55 15 20 10
2020 60 15 15 10
2021 62 15 15 8
2022 65 10 15 10
Be sure to follow proper design conventions for displays. Use codes and a key, if necessary.
b. Choose a second method of graphing that might allow the decision makers at Manhanda’s to see 
a trend in the purchase of particular uniform styles over time. Draw a graph for display as part of 
the output for Mandhana’s executive dashboard. Be sure to follow proper design conventions for 
displays. Use codes and a key, if necessary.
c. In a paragraph, discuss the differences in the two onscreen graphs you have chosen. Defend your 
choices.
9. Michael Cerveris owns a number of cars used for racing. What performance measures does he need 
to develop to keep track of the performance of his driver, pit crews, and support staff (not to mention 
any bald tires his cars experience)?
10. Design a dashboard for Michael from Problem 9. Use appropriate types of charts and graphs to illus-
trate performance.
11. Design a dashboard for keeping track of a person’s stock and portfolio. Think about how the dash-
board could be used to make decisions about buying and selling stock. Remember that a client can 
have more than one stockbroker.
12. Ayo Jaiyesimi runs a nonprofit theater that produces seven plays per year in three theaters. Each play 
lasts eight weeks but can be extended four weeks if the show is a success. Design a dashboard for 
Ayo, taking into consideration the different phases of putting on a performance as well as the need 
to sell as many tickets as possible. Don’t forget that Ayo is involved in theater and is very visual. She 
doesn’t like tables, however.
13. Browse the web to view well-designed and poorly designed websites. Choose three examples of each 
and list their web addresses. Comment on what makes each of the sites excellent or poor, using the 
critique form presented earlier in the chapter to compare and contrast them.
14. Propose a website for Mandhana’s, the uniform company described in Problems 7 and 8. Sketch by 
hand or use form design software to create a prototype of Mandhana’s home page. Indicate hyper-
links and include a sketch of one hyperlink document. Remember to include graphics, icons, and 
even sound or other media, if appropriate. In a paragraph, describe who the intended users of the 
website are and state why it makes sense for Mandhana’s to have a web presence. Specify whether 
you will be using flat web design or skeuomorphic design to create your icons and graphics and add 
a paragraph to justify your decision.
15. Kintetsu Department Stores is a chain of about 50 retail stores, specializing in kitchen, bath, and 
other household items, including many decorative and fashionable items. Recently Kintetsu’s decided 
to put its gift registry online to allow wedding and other event guests to be able to browse for gift 
items that were selected by the wedding couple or others.
a. Design a web page that would allow customers to enter a postal code and find the nearest 
Kintetsu’s store.
b. Design a web page for customers to browse wedding gifts and order them online. Do not include 
the actual ordering forms, simply the products. What sort of options should be available for cus-
tomers? Include buttons or links to change the sort sequence in your design. Your design should 
include the quantity of an item a wedding couple would like (for example, one pair of crystal can-
dleholders; one fully equipped picnic basket; eight formal place settings including dinner plates, 
salad plates, soup plates, and dessert plates; and chopsticks and chopstick rests). Also include an 
icon or text that shows how many items have been purchased and whether the maximum requested 
has been reached. Use a megamenu approach for your web page.


===== BOOK PAGE 363 =====

CHAPTER 11  •  DEsigning EffECTivE  OuTPuT     363
c. Design an ordering option that allows customers to click on an item they would like to purchase 
that puts them on the checkout page. Be sure to include an option where gifts can be wrapped and 
sent directly to the wedding couple from Kintetsu’s. Include an option for the purchaser to write a 
card to the couple at the time of purchase.
d. Design a printed list that customers could request when they go to one of the stores. What 
sequences would be optimal for a customer trying to find items? Would all items requested by the 
wedding couple be included on the list? (Hint: Some may have been purchased already.)
16. Design an outline of a podcast for someone touring your university, college, or business. In what 
sequence would you place the topics? How much time would you allow for each campus or building 
location? Assume that the visitor will arrive in the morning and remember to sequence a lunch break 
into the podcast.
17. Draw a diagram that compares the flow of app development through the 14 steps with the seven 
phases of the systems development life cycle, which is composed of: (1) identifying problems, 
opportunities, and objectives; (2) determining human information requirements; (3) analyzing system 
needs; (4) designing the recommended system; (5) developing and documenting software; (6) testing 
and maintaining the system; and (7) implementing and evaluating the system.
18. Write two paragraphs that compare and contrast the process of app development and the seven phases 
of the systems development life cycle as you diagrammed it in Problem 17.
19. Design an airline flight reminder screen for a passenger’s smartphone using portrait orientation.
20. Design an airline flight reminder screen for a passenger’s tablet using landscape orientation.
21. Design an Ajax-style web page that would allow a dean at a community college to select part-time 
instructors for IT Project Management courses. The dean should be able to select a discipline or a 
course and have the server send an XML document containing all the potential part-time instruc-
tors for the selection. The XML document should be used to populate a drop-down list of the 
instructor names. Clicking an instructor’s name would display information about the potential 
instructor. Decide what information to include that would help the dean decide whom to hire. 
(Hint: Part-time instructors may be able to teach only on certain days or only in the morning, 
afternoon, or evening. They may have preferences for topics they would rather teach or at which 
they excel.)
Group Projects
1. Brainstorm with your team members about what types of output are most appropriate for a variety of 
executives and high-level managers of Dizzyland, a large theme park in Florida. Include a list of envi-
ronments or decision-making situations and types of output. In a paragraph, discuss why the group 
suggested particular options for output.
2. Have each group member design an output display or form for the output situations you listed in 
Group Project 1. (Use either Microsoft Visio, a CASE tool like Visible Analyst, or a paper layout 
form to complete each display or form.)
3. Create a dashboard for Dizzyland managers in Group Project 1.
4. Together with your team, design a poster-size infographic to post near the desktop computers of 
corporate users that reminds them to back up their data on a regular basis. Remember to use a catchy 
title, a limited color palette, icons, and summary statistics or ratings to convey a strong, straightfor-
ward message.
5. Design a website, either on paper or using software with which you are familiar, for Dizzyland in 
Group Project 1.
a. Although you may sketch documents or graphics for three levels of pages and required hyperlinks 
on paper, create a prototype home or landing page for Dizzyland, indicating hyperlinks where 
appropriate.
b. Obtain feedback from other groups in your class and modify your design accordingly. In a 
paragraph, discuss how designing a website is different from designing displays for other online 
systems.
6. Without looking at your phone or tablet, design three sample pages for the following apps. You do 
not need to use a mockup app for this assignment. Just draw them on paper. (Note that each group 
may be assigned a different app to do.)
a. A grocery list and coupon helper
b. A hotel and room finder
c. An app to help you get to sleep
d. A task management (to-do) list
e. An apartment finder
f. A weather app


===== BOOK PAGE 364 =====

364    PART iv •  THE EssEnTiALs  Of  DEsign
7. Explore the Joomla! website at www.joomla.org. How could this open source application be helpful 
in implementing your designs from Group Project 4? Summarize your findings in a paragraph. Find 
another content management system on the web and write a paragraph comparing it to Joomla! Be 
sure to address cost, ease of use, support, and availability in your comparison.
Selected Bibliography
Budiu, R. (2020, February 2). Information scent: How users decide where to go next. https://www.
nngroup.com/articles/information-scent/
Datawrapper. (n.d.). Welcome to The River. https://app.datawrapper.de/river
Davenport, T. H. (1994, March–April). Saving IT’s soul: Human-centered information management. 
Harvard Business Review, pp. 119–131.
Davis, G. B., & Olson, H. M. (1985). Management information systems: Conceptual foundations, 
structure, and development (2nd ed.). McGraw-Hill.
Deighton, K. (2021, October 13). MTA tests new subway map that evokes jet-
tisoned 1972 version. Wall Street Journal. https://www.wsj.com/articles/
mta-tests-new-subway-map-that-evokes-jettisoned-1972-version-11634119201
Genzlinger, N. (2020). Michael Hertz —You’ve Surely Seen His Subway Map—Dies at 87 https://www.
nytimes.com/2020/02/25/nyregion/michael-hertz-dead.html
Goldbaum, C. Finally, a Subway Map with Real-Time Train Locations and Delays. https://www.nytimes.
com/2020/10/21/nyregion/new-nyc-subway-map.html
Kendall, K. E., & Kendall, J. E. (2008). DSS systems analysis and design: The role of the analyst as 
change agent from early DSS to mashups. In F. Burstein & C. W. Holsapple (Eds.), Handbook of 
decision support systems (V ol. 2, pp. 293–312). Springer.
Kendall, J. E., Kendall, K. E., & Mirakula, H. (2011, November). Systems design considerations for 
Web 2.0 technologies. Presentation at the annual meeting of the Decision Sciences Institute, Boston.
Laubheimer, P. (2019, August 11). The 3-click rule for navigation is false. https://www.nngroup.com/
articles/3-click-rule/
Majrashi, K. (2022). Performance of mobile users with text-only and text-and-icon menus in seated and 
walking situations, Behaviour & Information Technology, 41(1), 32–50.
Nevo, D., Benbasat, I., & Wand, Y . (2012). Understanding technology support for organizational transac-
tive memory: Requirements, application, and customization. Journal of Management Information 
Systems, 28(4), 69–98.
Nielsen, J., & Li, A. (2017, March 26). Mega menus work well for site navigation. https://www.nngroup.
com/articles/mega-menus-work-well/
Pirolli, P., & Card, S. K. (1999). Information foraging. Psychological Review, 106, 643–675.
Porter, J. (2003, April 16). Testing the three-click rule. https://articles.uie.com/three_click_rule/
Porter, J. (2008). Designing for the social web. New Riders.
Souders, S. (2008). High-performance websites. Communications of the ACM, 51(12), 36–41.
Symons, M. (2021, November 8). NJ Transit completes installation of new ticket vending machines. 
https://nj1015.com/nj-transit-completes-installation-of-new-ticket-vending-machines/
Xia, V . (2017, September 11). UX vs UI vs IA vs IxD: 4 confusing digital design terms defined. https://
uxplanet.org/ux-vs-ui-vs-ia-vs-ixd-4-confusing-digital-design-terms-defined-1ae2f82418c7


===== BOOK PAGE 365 =====

365
Designing Effective Input
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Once you have mastered the material in this chapter, you will be able to:
1 Appreciate the principles of good form design and how to design forms.
2 Learn about good display and web form design and how to accomplish them.
3 Value good web design and be able to follow basic rules on website design.
Users deserve quality output. The quality of system input determines the quality of system 
output. It is vital that input forms, displays, and interactive web documents be designed with 
this critical relationship in mind.
Well-designed input forms, displays, and interactive web fill-in forms should meet the 
objectives of effectiveness, accuracy, ease of use, consistency, simplicity, and attractive-
ness. All these objectives are attainable using basic design principles, knowledge of what 
is needed as input for the system, and an understanding of how users respond to different 
elements of forms and displays.
Effectiveness means that input forms, input displays, and fill-in forms on the web all 
serve specific purposes for users of the information system, whereas accuracy refers to 
design that ensures proper completion. Ease of use means that forms and displays are 
straightforward and require no extra time for users to decipher. Consistency means that 
all input forms, whether they are input displays or fill-in forms on the web, group data 
similarly from one application to the next, and simplicity refers to keeping those same 
designs uncluttered in a manner that focuses the user’s attention. Attractiveness implies 
that users will enjoy using input forms because of their appealing design. Analysts can 
use standard navigational elements and icons such as a hamburger icon or menu, context- 
sensitive help, input validation, a breadcrumb trail, and fat footers to give their web designs 
a professional look that users can readily understand and use.
12 
CHAPTER

