
===== BOOK PAGE 366 =====

366    PART IV  •  THE ESSENTIALS OF DESIGN
GOOD FORM DESIGN
Whether designing paper or web-based forms, a systems analyst should be capable of designing 
a complete and useful form. Unnecessary forms that waste an organization’s resources should 
be eliminated.
Forms are important instruments for steering the course of work. They are preprinted papers 
that require people to fill in responses in a standardized way. Forms elicit and capture information 
required by organization members that will often be input into the computer. Through this process, 
forms often serve as source documents for users or for input to ecommerce applications that users 
must enter.
To design forms that people find useful, four guidelines for form design should be observed:
1. Make forms easy to fill in.
2. Ensure that forms meet the purpose for which they are designed.
3. Design forms to ensure accurate completion.
4. Keep forms attractive.
Each of the four guidelines is considered separately in the following sections.
Making Forms Easy to Fill In
To reduce error, speed completion, and facilitate the entry of data, it is essential that forms be 
easy to fill in. The cost of forms is minimal compared with the cost of the time employees spend 
filling them in and then entering data into the information system. It is often possible to eliminate 
the process of transcribing data that are entered on a form into the system by using electronic 
submission. That method often features data keyed in by users themselves, who visit websites set 
up for informational or ecommerce transactions.
Form Flow. Designing for proper form flow can minimize the time and effort employees expend 
in form completion. Forms should flow from left to right and top to bottom. Illogical flow takes 
extra time and is frustrating. A form that requires people to go directly to the bottom of the form 
and then skip back up to the top for completion has poor flow.
takes you through a wide range of input devices. These devices make 
it easier to input data while at the same time ensuring the accuracy 
of data. After you view the video, please reflect on the following 
questions:
1. Credit cards have chips, but the same information can be 
typed into a web form or read by “tap to pay” systems. What 
way do you prefer to input your credit card data? Are you 
distinct from, or similar to, other users in your preferences?
2. Scanners such as flatbeds can be coupled with optical 
character recognition. Text can be input easily this way. 
Consider your experiences with scanning input.
3. QR codes and bar codes are posted so that users can easily 
scan them with their phones and be immediately directed 
to relevant websites. Think about whether you trust that the 
posted QR code or bar code will direct you to the correct site. 
Why or why not?
4. Reflect on how any of these input devices can be of 
particular help to people with disabilities.
SYSTEMS SCENARIO  
Considering a Variety of Input Devices
Chapter 12 is about getting data into the system. Some data 
is captured from handwritten responses on forms, other data is 
captured when people enter it on display screens or tablets. Still 
other information is entered on websites. But much information is 
entered through other hardware devices. In this video, the moderator 
To view the video for this scenario,  
see eText Chapter 12.
Packt Computing and Information 
Technology/Boclips


===== BOOK PAGE 367 =====

CHAPTER 12  •  DESIGNING  EFFECTIVE  INPuT     367
Seven Sections of a Form. A second method that makes it easy for people to fill out forms 
correctly is logical grouping of information. The seven main sections of a form are the following:
1. Heading
2. Identification and access
3. Instructions
4. Body
5. Signature and verification
6. Totals
7. Comments
Ideally, these sections should appear on a page grouped as they are on Bakerloo’s Employee 
Expense V oucher in Figure 12. 1. Notice that the seven sections cover the basic information 
required on most forms. The top quarter of the form is devoted to three sections: the heading, the 
identification and access section, and the instructions section.
The heading section usually includes the name and address of the business originating the 
form. The identification and access section includes codes that may be used to file the report and 
FIGURE 12.1
Seven sections found in a 
well-designed form help 
encourage completion.
EMPLOYEE EXPENSE VOUCHER
Claimant: Make No Entries
in Shaded Areas
Full Name of Employee
Department         R o o m  N u m b e r
Employee ID Number  
LIST EXPENSES FOR EACH DAY SEPARATELY . ATTACH RECEIPTS FOR ALL EXPENSES EXCEPT MEALS, TAXIS,
AND MISCELLANEOUS ITEMS LESS THAN $3.00. ITEMIZE ALL MISCELLANEOUS EXPENSES.
Date
 /   /
Place
City, State 
Meal
Expenses
Lodging
Expenses Miles Cost 
Automobile 
Description Cost 
Miscellaneous Total 
Cost 
Taxi 
Cost 
I certify that all the above information is correct
Signature of Claimant
Approved by
Form BB-104  01/2022
Date
Date
Totals
Bakerloo’s
Voucher Number
Action Taken On:


===== BOOK PAGE 368 =====

368    PART IV  •  THE ESSENTIALS OF DESIGN
gain access to it later. (In Chapter 13, we discuss in detail how to access specially keyed informa-
tion in a database.) This information is very important when an organization is required to keep 
the document for a specified number of years. The instructions section tells how the form should 
be filled out and where it should be routed when complete.
The middle of the form is its body, which composes approximately half of the form. This part 
of the form requires the most detail and development from the person completing it. The body is 
the part of the form most likely to contain explicit, variable data.
The bottom quarter of the form is composed of three sections: signature and verification, 
totals, and comments. Requiring ending totals and a summary of comments is a logical way to 
provide closure for the person filling out the form.
There is one more feature to notice about the form from Bakerloo’s. The form design provides 
an internal double-check, with column totals and row totals expected to add up to the same number. 
If the row and column totals don’t add up to the same number, the employee filling out the form 
knows there is a problem and can correct it on the spot. An error is prevented, and the employee 
can be reimbursed the amount due; both outcomes are attributable to the suitable form design.
Captioning. Clear captioning is another technique that can make easy work of filling out a form. 
Captions tell the person completing the form what to put in a blank line, space, or box. Several 
options for captioning are shown in Figure 12.2. Two types of line captions, two types of check-
off captions, and examples of a boxed caption and table caption are shown.
The advantage of putting the caption below the line is that there is more room on the line 
itself for data. The disadvantage is that it is sometimes unclear which line is associated with the 
caption—the line above or below the caption. Line captions can be to the left of blanks and on 
the same line, or they can be printed below the line on which data will be entered.
Another way to caption is to provide a box for data instead of a line. Captions can be placed 
inside, above, or below the box. Boxes on forms help people enter data in the correct place, and 
they also make reading the form easier for the form’s recipient. The caption should use a small 
type size so that it does not dominate the entry area. Small vertical tick marks may be included 
in the box if the data is intended for entry into a computer system. If there is not enough room 
on a record for the data, the person filling out the form, rather than the data-entry operator, has 
the freedom to determine how the data should be abbreviated. Captions may also include small 
clarification notes to help the user correctly enter the information, such as Date (MM/DD/YYYY) 
or Name (Last, First, Middle Initial).
Whatever styles of line caption are chosen, it is important to employ them consistently. For 
instance, it is confusing to fill out a form that has both above- and below-line captions.
Check-off captions are superior when response options are necessarily restricted. Notice 
the list of travel methods shown for the vertical check-off caption in Figure 12.2. If employee 
expenses for business travel are reimbursed only for the travel methods listed, a check-off system 
is more expedient than a blank line. This method has the added advantage of reminding the person 
who is verifying the data to look for an airline ticket stub or other receipt.
A horizontal check-off caption is also superior to a line caption when information required is 
routine and constant. An example is a form that would request services from one of the following 
departments: Photo Lab, Printing Department, Maintenance, or Supplies. The departments 
routinely provide services to others in the organization and are not likely to change quickly.
Table captions work well in the body of a form on which details are required. When an 
employee fills out a form with table captions properly, they are creating a table for the next person 
receiving the form, thereby helping to organize data coherently.
A combination of captions can be used effectively. For example, table captions can be used to 
specify categories such as quantity, and line captions can be used to indicate where the subtotal, 
sales tax, and total should be. Because different captions serve different purposes, it is generally 
necessary to employ several caption styles in each form.
Meeting the Intended Purpose
Forms are created to serve one or more purposes in the recording, processing, storing, and 
retrieving of information for businesses. Sometimes it is desirable to provide different information 
to different departments or users but still share some basic information. This situation is where 
specialty forms are useful.


===== BOOK PAGE 369 =====

CHAPTER 12  •  DESIGNING  EFFECTIVE  INPuT     369
The term specialty form can also refer solely to the way forms are prepared by the stationer 
or professional printer. Examples of stationers’ specialty forms are multiple-part forms that are 
used to create instant triplicates of data, continuous-feed forms that run through the printer without 
intervention, and perforated forms that leave a stub behind as a record when they are separated.
Ensuring Accurate Completion
Error rates typically associated with collecting data drop sharply when forms are designed to 
ensure accurate completion. Design is important for ensuring that people do the right thing with 
the form whenever they use it. When service employees such as meter readers or inventory takers 
use handheld devices to scan or otherwise key in data at the appropriate site, the extra step of 
transcription during data entry is avoided. Handheld devices use wireless transmission or are 
plugged back into larger computer systems so they can upload the data that the service worker 
has stored. No further transcription of what has occurred in the field is necessary.
FIGURE 12.2
Major captioning alternatives that 
can be used on paper, online, or on 
computer displays.
First Name
First Name Last Name
Last Name
Title Telephone   (         )             –
First Name
Title
Title
Check oﬀ method of travel:
Airplane
Train
Company Car
Personal Car
Telephone
Last Name
Telephone
–            –
–            –
Photo Lab
Quantity
Printing Department Maintenance Supplies
Unit Item Description User Cost Expanded Cost
Subtotal
Sales Tax
Total
Horizontal
checklist
Boxed caption
Line caption
Below-line
caption
T able caption
Vertical
checklist


===== BOOK PAGE 370 =====

370    PART IV  •  THE ESSENTIALS OF DESIGN
Keeping Forms Attractive
Although we deal with attractiveness of forms last, its order of appearance is not meant to diminish 
its importance. Rather, it is addressed last because making forms appealing is accomplished by 
applying the techniques discussed in the preceding sections. Aesthetic forms draw people into 
them and encourage completion.
Forms should look uncluttered. To be attractive, forms should elicit information in the 
expected order; convention dictates asking for name, street address, city, state, and postal code 
(and country, if necessary). Proper layout and flow contribute to a form’s attractiveness.
Using different type fonts in the same form can help make it appealing for users to fill in. 
Separating categories and subcategories with thick and thin lines also may encourage interest 
in the form. Type fonts and line weights are useful design elements for capturing attention and 
making people feel secure that they are filling in the form correctly.
Controlling Business Forms
Controlling business forms is an important task. Businesses often have a forms specialist who 
controls forms, but sometimes this job falls to a systems analyst, who sets up and implements 
forms control.
The basic duties for controlling forms include making sure that each form in use fulfills its 
specific purpose in helping workers accomplish their tasks and that the specified purpose is integral 
to organizational functioning, preventing duplication of the information that is collected and of the 
forms that collect it, designing effective forms, deciding on how to reproduce forms in the most 
economical way, and establishing procedures that make forms available (when needed) at the lowest 
possible cost. Often this entails making forms available on the web for printing out. A unique form 
number and revision date (month/year) should be included on each form, regardless of whether it 
is completed and submitted manually or electronically. This helps users be organized and efficient.
GOOD DISPLAY AND WEB FORM DESIGN
Much of what we have already said about good form design is transferable to display design and 
the design of websites, web pages, smartphones, and tablets. Once again, the users must remain 
foremost in an analyst’s thoughts during the design of displays.
There are differences, however, and systems analysts should strive to realize the unique quali-
ties of displays rather than to simply adopt the conventions of paper forms. One big difference is 
the constant presence of a cursor on the display, which orients the user to the current data-entry 
position. As data are entered onscreen, the cursor moves one character ahead, pointing the way.
Another major difference among electronic, web, and static forms is that designers can 
include context-sensitive user help in any electronic fill-in form. This practice can reduce the 
need for instructions being shown for each line, thus reducing the clutter of the form and cutting 
down on calls to technical support. Using a web-based approach also permits the designer to take 
advantage of hyperlinks, thus ensuring that the forms are filled out correctly by providing users 
with hyperlinked examples of correctly completed forms.
In this section, we present guidelines for effective display design. They are presented to aid 
the attainment of the overall input design goals of effectiveness, accuracy, ease of use, simplicity, 
consistency, and attractiveness. The following four guidelines for display design are important 
but not exhaustive (refer to Chapter 11):
1. Keep the display simple.
2. Keep the display presentation consistent.
3. Facilitate user movement among display screens and pages.
4. Create an attractive and pleasing display.
In the next subsections, we develop each of these guidelines and present many design techniques 
for observing the four guidelines.
Keeping the Display Simple
The first guideline for good display design is to keep the display simple. The display should show 
only that which is necessary for the particular action being undertaken. For the occasional user, 
50 percent of the display area should contain useful information.


===== BOOK PAGE 371 =====

CHAPTER 12  •  DESIGNING  EFFECTIVE  INPuT     371
Three Screen Sections. Display output should be divided into three sections. The top of the screen 
features a heading section. The heading contains titles of software and open files, pull-down 
menus, and icons that do certain tasks.
The middle section is called the body of the display. The body can be used for data entry and 
is organized from left to right and top to bottom because people in Western cultures move their 
eyes over a page in this way. Captions and instructions should be supplied in this section to help 
the user enter the pertinent data in the right place. Context-sensitive help can be made available 
by having the user click the right mouse button in the body section of the display.
The third section of the display is the comments and instructions section. This section may 
display a short menu of commands that remind the user of basics such as how to change pages or 
functions, save the file, or terminate entry. Inclusion of such basics can make inexperienced users 
feel infinitely more secure about their ability to complete their task.
Other ways to keep the display simple are to use context-sensitive help, rollover buttons that 
reveal more information, and other pop-up windows. Also, keep in mind that users can minimize 
or maximize windows as needed. In this way, users start with a simple, well-designed display 
that they can customize and control using multiple windows. Hyperlinks on a web-based fill-in 
form serve a similar purpose.
Keeping the Display Consistent
The second guideline for good display design is to keep the display consistent. If users are working 
from paper forms, displays should follow what is shown on paper. Displays can be kept consistent 
by locating information in the same area each time a new display is accessed. Also, information 
that logically belongs together should be consistently grouped together: name and address go 
together, not name and postal code. Although the display should have a natural movement from 
one region to another, information should not overlap from one group to another. You would not 
want name and address in one area and postal code in another.
Facilitating Movement
The third guideline for good display design is to make it easy to move from one page to another. 
Although the “three-clicks” rule says that users should be able to get to the pages they need within 
three mouse clicks or keyboard strokes, new research (Nielsen & Li, 2017) notes that this is a 
heuristic, not a hard-and-fast rule. It should not hamper designers. Web-based forms facilitate 
movement with the use of hyperlinks to other relevant web pages. Another common method 
for movement is to have users feel as if they are physically moving to a new page. This illusion of 
physical movement among screens can be obtained by using scrolling arrows, context-sensitive 
pop-up windows, or onscreen dialog.
Designing an Attractive and Pleasing Display
The fourth guideline for good display design is to create an attractive display. If users find 
displays appealing, they are likely to be more productive, need less supervision, and make 
fewer errors. Displays should draw users into them and hold their attention. This goal is accom-
plished with the use of plenty of open area surrounding data-entry fields so that the display 
achieves an uncluttered appearance. Never crowd a form; similarly, never crowd a display. You 
are far better off using multiple windows or hyperlinks than jamming everything onto one page  
or screen.
Use logical flows in the plan to your display pages. Organize material to take advantage of 
the way people conceptualize their work so that they can easily find their way around. With the 
advent of graphical user interfaces, it is possible to make input displays very attractive. By using 
color or shaded boxes and creating three-dimensional boxes and arrows, you can make forms user 
friendly and fun to use.
When contemplating the use of different font styles and sizes, ask yourself if they truly assist 
the user in understanding and approving of the display. If they draw undue attention to the art of 
display design or if they serve as a distraction, leave them out. Be aware that not all web pages 
are viewed identically by different browsers. Test your prototype forms with a variety of combi-
nations to see whether users declare preferences for combinations or whether they are distressing 
to most users.


===== BOOK PAGE 372 =====

372    PART IV  •  THE ESSENTIALS OF DESIGN
sure the form is self-explanatory to new patients. It should also 
be easy for Mai to read and easy for the receptionist to enter into 
the patient database, which is sorted by patient name and a unique 
seven-digit account ID number. Recently all the doctors associated 
with Mai Krobe’s practice decided to experiment with patients 
filling out this form using an iPad issued by the office. Redesign 
the form for both landscape and portrait orientation for an iPad. 
Which office procedures would you have to change to accommodate 
patient data entry with an iPad? Provide your answer in a paragraph, 
including manual and computerized procedures and processes.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 12.1 
This Form May Be Hazardous to Your Health
F igure 12.C1 is a printed medical history form that Dr. Mai Krobe,  
a family practitioner, has her receptionist give to all new patients. 
Patients must fill it out before they see the doctor.
The receptionist is getting back many incomplete or confusing 
responses, which makes it difficult for Mai to review the forms 
and understand why the new patient is there. In addition, the poor 
responses make it time-consuming for the receptionist to enter new 
patients into the database.
Redesign the form on ½ ×81 1-inch paper so that pertinent new 
patient data can be collected in a logical and inoffensive way. Make 
FIGURE 12. C1
Your help in improving this form is greatly appreciated.
Have you ever had surgery?    Yes____    No____    If so, when?________
Describe the surgery
Have you ever been hospitalized?    Yes____    No____    If so, when?________
Why?
Complete the following.
I have had Family history
Diabetes
Heart trouble
Cancer
Seizure
Fainting
What have you been immunized for?
Family:
Spouse or next of kin Relationship Address
Date of last exam  ___/___   Who referred you?
Why are you seeing the doctor today?
Are you currently having pain? _______   Constant ______   Sporadic ______
How long does it last? Please give us your soc. sec. #
IMPORTANT!  We need your correct insurance carrier number
Medical History Form
Name Employer Age
Address Zip Phone Oﬃce
Insurer Is this   [  ] your policy   [  ] your spouse’s/partner’s policy
Blue Cross [  ]    State Physician’s  Service [  ]    Other [  ]    (state)
This form
needs to be
revised.


===== BOOK PAGE 373 =====

CHAPTER 12  •  DESIGNING  EFFECTIVE  INPuT     373
Using Icons in Display Design
Icons are pictorial, onscreen representations symbolizing computer actions that users may select 
using a mouse, keyboard, lightpen, touch screen, or joystick. Icons serve functions like those 
of words and may replace them in many menus because their meaning is more quickly grasped 
than words. Mobile devices such as Apple’s iPhone and iPad have popularized the use of icons on 
touch screens and made this a familiar interface for many businesses and other users.
There are some guidelines for the design of effective icons. Shapes should be readily recog-
nizable, so users are not required to master a new vocabulary. Numerous icons are already known 
to most users. Use of standard icons can quickly tap into this reservoir of common meaning.  
A user may point to a file cabinet, “pull out” a file folder icon, “grab” a piece of paper icon, and 
“throw” it in the wastebasket icon. By employing standard icons, designers and users save time.
Icons for a particular application should be limited to approximately 20 recognizable shapes 
so the icon vocabulary is not overwhelming and a worthwhile coding scheme can still be realized. 
Use icons consistently throughout applications where they will appear together to ensure continuity 
and understandability. Generally, icons are worthwhile for users if they are meaningful.
Graphical User Interface Design
Users interface with an operating system, such as Windows or the Mac OS, through a graphical 
user interface (GUI; pronounced “GOO-ey”), also referred to as a point-and-click interface. Users 
can use a mouse to click on an object and drag it into position. GUIs take advantage of additional 
FIGURE 12. C2
This screen can be designed 
to be more user friendly. Patient Last Name First Middle Initial
Examining Station       Date of Exam
Patient Number Social Security Number
First Exam Claim Number
SPEECH AUDIOMETRY SECT. Comments [
SPEECH RECEP .  THRESHOLD
Right Ear [   ]
Left Ear [   ] Referred by [                          ] 
RIGHT EAR DISCR. Reason for Referral
% [   ] Masking [   ] 
% [   ] Masking [   ] 
Examining Audiologist 
LEFT EAR DISCRIM. Exam. Audiologist’s No.
Next Appt. 
AUDIOLOGICAL EXAMINATION REPORT
AIR CONDUCTION
BONE CONDUCTION
500     1000     2000     4000     6000
Right ear
500     1000     2000     4000     6000
Left ear
500     1000     2000     4000     6000
Right ear
500     1000     2000     4000     6000
Left ear
This screen
can be
improved.
You have been asked to redesign the display (see Figure 12.C2) 
to capture the same information but simplify it, and by doing so 
reduce the errors that have been plaguing the audiologists. You 
realize that clutter isn’t the only problem with the display.
Explain your reasons for changing the display as you did. You 
may use more than one display page if you think it is necessary.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 12.2 
Squeezin’ Isn’t Pleasin’
T he Audiology Department in a large veteran’s hospital is using a 
PC and monitor so audiology technicians can enter data directly into 
the patient records system. After talking with Earl Lobes, one of the 
audiologists, you determine that the screen design is a major problem.
“We used a form at one time, and that was decent,” said Earl. 
“The display didn’t make sense, though. I guess they had to squeeze 
everything on there, and that ruined it.”


===== BOOK PAGE 374 =====

374    PART IV  •  THE ESSENTIALS OF DESIGN
FIGURE 12.3
The many available GUI compo-
nents allow flexibility in designing 
input screens for the web or other 
software packages. This example 
is from Microsoft Access. (Used 
with permission from Microsoft)
features in display design such as text boxes, check boxes, option buttons, list and drop-down 
list boxes, sliders and spin buttons, tab control dialog boxes, and image maps. Figure 12.3 is a 
Microsoft Access input display showing a variety of GUI controls.
Text Boxes. A rectangle represents a text box and is used to outline data-entry and display fields. 
Care must be taken to ensure that a text box is large enough to accommodate all the characters 
that must be entered. Each text box should have a caption to the left, identifying what is to be 
entered or what is displayed in the box. In Microsoft Access, character data are left-aligned, and 
numeric data are right-aligned.
Starting with HTML5 browsers, a feature called a placeholder allows a designer to put a 
small amount of text into a text box, which will display in a lighter color, informing the viewer 
what to key into the text box. When the cursor is placed in the field (clicking or tabbing into it), 
the text vanishes.
Several new types of text boxes are available with HTML5: email, telephone, and URL (a 
web address). These appear as normal text boxes on a computer but when used on a tablet or 
smartphone, they can be used to customize the pop-up keyboard. For example, if the text box is 
used for a telephone number, the virtual keyboard layout changes to a number pad. If the text box 
is used to enter a URL, the virtual keyboard includes a .com button. Finally, if the text box is used 
to enter an email address, the virtual keyboard includes an @ symbol. This customization helps 
the user enter data quickly and accurately.
A datalist is a new feature included in HTML5 that displays a drop-down list of predefined 
suggestions to make entry easier for the user. As the user begins to type the first few letters, the 
datalist is displayed. The user can choose one of the items in the list to make a selection. This is 
used in the autocomplete function.
Check Boxes. In the GUI controls example, a check box is used to indicate a new customer. 
Check boxes contain an X or are empty, depending on whether the user selected the option; they 
are used for nonexclusive choices in which one or more of the options may be checked. An alterna-
tive notation is to use a square button with a check mark (✓) to indicate that the option has been 
selected. Note that check box text, or a label, is usually placed to the right of the box. If there is 
more than one check box, the labels should have some order to them, either alphabetic or with 
the most commonly checked item appearing first in a list. If there are more than 10 check boxes, 
you can group them together in a bordered box.
Option Buttons. An option button, also called a radio button, is used to select exclusive choices. 
Only one of several options can be chosen. By using option buttons, you can make it clear to users 
that they must decide among options. Choices are again listed to the right of the button, usually 
in some sequence. If there is a commonly selected option, it is usually selected as a default when


===== BOOK PAGE 375 =====

CHAPTER 12  •  DESIGNING  EFFECTIVE  INPuT     375
the page first displays. Often there is a rectangle, called an option group, surrounding the radio 
buttons. If there are more than six option buttons, you should consider using a list box or a drop-
down list box.
List and Drop-Down List Boxes. A list box displays several options that may be selected with the 
mouse. A drop-down list box is used when there is little room available on the page. A single 
rectangle with an arrow points down toward a line located on the right side of the rectangle. 
Selecting this arrow causes a list box to be displayed. Once a user makes a choice, it is displayed 
in the drop-down selection rectangle and the list box disappears. If there is a commonly selected 
choice, it is usually displayed in the drop-down list by default. An elegant way to handle making 
a selection from a predetermined list is available when developing drop-down lists for Apple 
products. You can insert a picker, which includes one or more scrollable lists of distinct values, 
each of which has a single selected value appearing in darker text in the center of the view  
(see https://developer.apple.com/ios/human-interface-guidelines/ui-controls/pickers/). Pickers can 
be placed at the bottom of the screen or used as a popover overlaying the app if the user is tapping 
on a menu. An example of a picker would be allowing the user to pick a destination city from a 
list of cities an airline stops in when the user is in an airline app. Another example is choosing a 
date when making an addition to one’s calendar.
Tab Control Dialog Boxes. Tab control dialog boxes are another part of graphical user interfaces 
and another way to get users organized and into system material efficiently. In designing tab 
control boxes, create a separate tab for each unique feature, place the most used tabs in front and 
display them first, and include buttons for OK, Cancel, and Help.
Sliders and Spin Buttons. Sliders and spin buttons are used to change data that have a continuous 
range of values, giving users more control when choosing values. Moving the slider in one 
direction or the other (either left/right or up/down) increases or decreases the values.
Calendar Control. Starting with HTML5, a designer may include a calendar control to select a 
date, a date and time, or a local date and time. A calendar is displayed, and the user either selects 
the default date or may change it by clicking on a date or scrolling through the calendar. This is 
common on hotel reservation sites. The default date may be today, but the user will change it to 
the actual arrival day. Once the user locates the arrival date on the calendar, a second calendar 
pops up with the next day as the default departure date. The user again changes this to the correct 
departure date, but the process of selecting dates from a pop-up calendar is still easier and less 
error-prone than entering text.
Image Maps. Image map fields are used to select values within an image. The user clicks on a 
point within an image, and the corresponding x- and y-coordinates are sent to the program. Image 
maps are used when creating web pages containing maps with instructions to click in a certain 
area to view a detailed map of the region. Image maps have waned in popularity over the last few 
years and can be difficult to build. Use an image map editor or a web editor rather than attempting 
to build an image map from the ground up.
Text Areas. A text area is used for entering a larger amount of text. These areas include several 
rows, columns, and scroll bars that allow the user to enter and view text greater than the size of the 
box area. There are two ways to handle this text. One is to avoid the use of word wrap, forcing  
the user to press the Enter key to move to the next line; the text will scroll to the right if it 
exceeds the width of the text area. The other option is to allow word wrap.
Message Boxes. Message boxes are used to warn users and provide other feedback messages in 
a dialog box, often overlapping the display. Message boxes have different formats. Each should 
appear in a rectangular window and should clearly spell out the message so that the user knows 
precisely what is happening and what actions are possible.
Command Buttons. A command button performs an action when the user selects it with the 
mouse. Calculate Total, Add Order, and OK are all examples. The text is centered inside the button, 
which has a rectangular shape. If there is a default action, the text is surrounded with a dashed 
line. The button also may be shaded to indicate that it is the default. Users press the Enter key to 
select the default button.


===== BOOK PAGE 376 =====

376    PART IV  •  THE ESSENTIALS OF DESIGN
Form Controls and Values
Each of the controls included in a GUI interface must have some way of storing the data associ-
ated with the control. On a web page this is done using a name and value pair that is transmitted 
to the server or in an email sent along with the form (such as the name city and the value Paris). 
The name is defined on the web page form, and the server software must recognize the name to 
understand what to do with the value or data sent with the web form.
How the value is obtained differs for each web form control. In text boxes or text areas, the 
value consists of the characters keyed into the boxes. In radio buttons and check boxes, the text 
that displays to the right of each radio button or check box is for human use only. The value is 
defined in the web form and is transmitted when the form is sent. If these data are used to update 
a database, the values are often codes that are sent and then stored at the server, and the analyst 
must decide what the appropriate values should be when each radio button or check box is clicked. 
Drop-down lists are somewhat different from radio buttons or check boxes in that there are many 
options for a given drop-down list. Values must be decided for each of the drop-down list options 
and, when an option is chosen, the selected value is sent with the form. Form values may be used 
in calculations performed using JavaScript on the browser to multiply, add, and make decisions.
Figure 12.4 is an example of a form used to obtain prices and to register for a cruise. The text 
in the Name, Address, City, State, Zip, Phone, and Email areas is sent to the server when the form 
is submitted. Only one of the radio buttons for a 4-day, 7-day, or 14-day cruise may be selected. 
The values sent are S for short if the 4-day cruise is selected, A for average length if 7 days has 
been selected, and L for a long cruise if the 14-day cruise is selected. In addition, when one of  
these cruises is selected, the dollar amount is inserted into one of the text boxes on the left side 
of the web form, and any previously selected radio buttons and amounts are cleared. If an ocean-
view room check box is checked, a value of Y for yes is transmitted to the server, the amount 
is inserted into the left-side text box, and the total is updated. If the customer tries to change 
the amounts in the calculated text boxes, they are reset. When the submit button is clicked, the 
amounts are sent to the server along with all the other data.
Hidden Fields
Another type of control found on web forms is a hidden field. These are not visible to the viewer, 
do not take up any space on the web page, and can contain only a name and a value. Often hidden 
fields are used to store values sent from one web form to the server. These typically need to be 
included on a second form when multiple forms are required to capture all the transaction data. 
Sometimes they are used to retain information about the type of browser being used, the viewer’s 
FIGURE 12.4
A web-based input form for users 
to register for a cruise.


===== BOOK PAGE 377 =====

CHAPTER 12  •  DESIGNING  EFFECTIVE  INPuT     377
operating system, and so on. Sometimes a hidden field contains a key field used to locate a record 
for the customer or the browsing session.
Event-Response Charts
When there are complicated interactions on a web form (or any other GUI form), an event-
response chart may be used to list the variety of events that can occur. Event-response charts 
may be used at a high level to model business events and responses (see Chapter 7), but the events 
that occur on a web form or other display are usually limited to user actions. These events may 
be clicking a button, changing a value, focusing the field (moving the cursor inside the field or 
to a radio button, check box, or other control), blurring a field (the user moves the cursor out of 
the field), loading a web page, detecting keystrokes, and many other events. The response lists 
how the web page should react when the event occurs. Events are for a particular object, such as 
a button, a text field, a whole web page, and so on.
Figure 12.5 is a website used to estimate the cost of staying at Azure Islé Resort. The user can 
enter the number of people, change the starting and ending dates, and enter the number of people 
for a variety of extra activities, such as scuba diving or golf.
An event-response chart is shown in Figure 12.6. Notice that there may be several events for 
each web form control. The user may do any number of actions in any order, so the event-response 
chart is useful to show what should happen. For example, the user may click the Calculate button 
first, change the starting and ending dates, or change the number of people. The event-response 
chart is useful for building a web form that requires minimal action from the user. An example of 
this is when the user changes the starting month or day; the ending month or day is then changed 
to match the starting month or day. The year changes when the month is earlier than the current 
month because people cannot stay at the resort prior to the current day in the same year.
Sometimes the event-response chart may be used to explore improvements to the web page. 
Suppose that Azure Islé Resort determined that most of its customers stayed for 7 days. When the 
starting month or day changes, the ending date could be set for 7 days in the future as a default. 
It might also be a good idea to have radio buttons that allow the customer to select a stay of 4, 7, 
or 14 days and calculate the ending date. Other improvements to a web page might be detecting 
when several characters have been entered, for example, the three digits that comprise a U.S. 
telephone area code, and then moving the cursor into the next field.
Events are not limited to working within a single web page. They may be used to control 
navigation among web pages as well. This can happen when changing a selection in a drop-down 
list or clicking a radio button. Events may be used to change the contents of drop-down lists. For 
example, on a job search page, by selecting one category of job, detailed positions for that job 
appear in a second drop-down list.
FIGURE 12.5
A website that permits users 
to estimate the cost of staying 
at Azure Islé Resort. The cost 
depends on the number of people 
included, length of stay, and extra 
activities added.


===== BOOK PAGE 378 =====

378    PART IV  •  THE ESSENTIALS OF DESIGN
FIGURE 12.6
An event-response chart that lists the form control, event, and response for a number of events that can occur 
as a user interacts with the Azure Islé Resort cost estimator screen.
Form Control Event Response
Web Page Page loads Place the current year in the Starting Year and Ending Year ﬁelds.
Place the cursor in the Number of People ﬁeld.
Number of People Value changes Verify that Number of People contains a number greater than zero.
Starting Month Selection
changes
Set the Ending Month in the drop-down list to the Starting Month. If the
month is less than the current month, change the Starting Year and 
Ending Year values to the next year.
Starting Day Selection
changes
Set the Ending Day in the drop-down list to the Starting Day. Use the
Starting Month value to set the Starting Year and Ending Year values.
Starting Year Receives focus Use the Starting Month value to calculate the Starting Year and
Ending Year values.
Number of Days Receives focus;
value changes
Calculate the Number of Days that the customer is staying. If the
number is less than or equal to zero, display an error message.
Basic Charge Receives focus Calculate the Basic Charge and put the cursor in the Scuba Adventure
Number of People ﬁeld.
Scuba Adventure
Number of People
Receives focus Select the current amount displayed (zero) so the customer may replace it.
Scuba Adventure
Number of People
Value changes Calculate the Scuba Cost based on the value of Scuba Adventure Number 
of People and put the cursor in the Golf Number of People ﬁeld.
Scuba Cost Value changes Recalculate the Scuba Cost and put the cursor in the Golf Number
of People ﬁeld.
Golf Number of
People
Receives focus Select the current amount (zero) so the customer may replace it.
Golf Number of
People
Value changes Calculate the Golf Cost and put the cursor in the Horseback Riding
Number of People ﬁeld.
Golf Cost Value changes Recalculate the Golf Cost and put the cursor in the Horseback Riding
Number of People ﬁeld.
Horseback Riding
Number of People
Receives focus Select the current amount displayed (zero) so the customer may replace it.
Horseback Riding
Number of People
Value changes Calculate the Horseback Riding Cost based on the value of Horseback
Riding Number of People and put the cursor in the Last Name ﬁeld.
Horseback Riding
Cost
Value changes Recalculate the Horseback Riding Cost and put the cursor in the 
Last Name ﬁeld.
Total Cost Value changes Calculate the total cost and put the cursor in the Last Name ﬁeld.
Calculate Button Button clicked Validate the form data and display an error message if any errors occur. 
Calculate the Total Cost if there are no errors.
Reset Button Button clicked Clear the form and place the current year in the Starting Year and Ending 
Year ﬁelds. Place the cursor in the Number of People ﬁeld.
Print Button Button clicked Validate the form data and display an error message if any errors occur. 
Calculate Total Cost if there are no errors. Use a Web cookie to pass the 
data to a conﬁrmation page that does not allow the users to change
any data.
Submit Button Button clicked Validate the form data and display an error message if any errors occur. 
Calculate Total Cost if there are no errors. Send the form to the server 
and send conﬁrmation to the user.
Dynamic Web Pages
Dynamic web pages change themselves as the result of user action. They often use JavaScript to 
modify some part of the web page or a style. Changing an image when the mouse moves over it 
or rotating random images at a given time interval are common examples of dynamic web pages. 
The web page may detect the width of the browser window and modify the page accordingly. 
Menus that expand when the user clicks a small plus sign to the left of the menu or when the 
mouse moves over a menu are other examples of dynamic web pages.


===== BOOK PAGE 379 =====

CHAPTER 12  •  DESIGNING  EFFECTIVE  INPuT     379
The power of dynamic web pages has been greatly expanded in recent web browsers. By 
using JavaScript, a web form may morph or change itself to add new fields or remove old fields, 
or change field attributes, such as the length of a field or a radio button changing into a check 
box. This makes the web page more responsive to user actions and often will eliminate the need 
to load new web pages based on user choices.
An analyst should think about the information that would make sense to the website viewer. 
For example, placing the country selection list on a web page before other address elements would 
allow the user to change the country list and then change captions to reflect the country. If the 
person selected United States from the drop-down list, the captions would say State and Zip Code. 
If the country were Canada, the captions would say Province and Postal Code. If the country were 
Japan, the captions would say Prefecture and Mail Code.
Three-Dimensional Web Pages
Dynamic web pages can be used to temporarily display information, such as a block of help 
information, a calendar with clickable dates used to assist date entry fields, airport codes, and 
other information. This information may be stored by using a series of stacked layers (using the 
cascading styles z-index property) in the web page design, each on top of another. The main web 
page is the base plane, the standard layer of the web page that displays or obtains information; 
other layers below the page are not visible.
When help is requested or the user clicks in the date field, the layer is either moved to the top 
and becomes visible or is generated by JavaScript code and appears. The position of the layer is 
determined by the designer or analyst, such as a calendar appearing on the right side of a date field. 
When a date is selected, a close link is clicked, or the user clicks outside of the calendar, the layer 
then moves below the surface of the web page or is removed. An analyst must determine when it 
makes sense to include a layer, often examining each field on a web page to determine whether 
additional information would help to ensure accurate information and good communication with 
the user.
The analyst should determine the following:
1. How is the layer built? Is it created using JavaScript code, such as a calendar, or is 
additional information required to build the layer? If additional information is required, 
where is the data located and how should it be obtained? Ideally the information is 
obtained from only one database table on the server using Ajax techniques.
2. What events cause the layer to be created? These include a user clicking or tabbing into a 
field, clicking a link, or counting the number of keystrokes entered into a field. An example 
would be a hotel chain with many locations. To include all the locations in a drop-down list 
would make the list too long. When the user enters three characters, a block surfaces listing 
hotels starting with those three letters, including the country, city, state or province, and 
other information. If the event was detecting only two letters, the list may be too large for 
the display block.
3. What events remove the layer, such as a close button, clicking a date, clicking outside the 
region, or selecting a hotel from the list?
4. Where should the surfaced block be placed? Typically, next to the field that created the 
block, in x- and y-coordinates.
5. How large should the block be, measured in pixels? If the information is too large for 
the block, such as a list of hotels, the analyst should decide how to handle the additional 
information. Options include adding scroll bars or positioning a link at the bottom to the 
next page of information.
6. What should the region formatting attributes, such as color and border, be? If there is a 
series of links, review their appearance with the users. Ask the users if they would like the 
color to change as the mouse moves over each row.
7. What should happen when an option is selected? In the case of a reservation calendar, 
when a date is clicked, the date is placed in the starting date. If a hotel is selected, the city, 
state or province, and country information, along with a link to the hotel, should populate 
the web form fields.
Using layers is an effective way to build websites because it does not require any pop-up 
pages (which may be blocked by internet security software). In addition, a new web page does


===== BOOK PAGE 380 =====

380    PART IV  •  THE ESSENTIALS OF DESIGN
not have to load and, because the information is contained in a layer, it does not take up any space 
on the main web page.
Figure 12.7 is an example of a web form used by an insurance company to change client 
information; to add a new location for a client, such as a new store or restaurant for an existing 
client; or to remove a store for the client. If the Corporate check box is checked, the Last 
Name, First Name, and Middle are changed to a Company name field, with the caption text 
changing as well. If the Add New Property button is clicked, a new set of fields for the third 
property is added. Care must be taken to generate unique names that the server will recognize 
for the additional fields. When the form is submitted, the server updates the database tables for 
the additional fields.
The analyst must decide when the use of dynamic web pages is appropriate. If the data change 
when other parts of the web page change (such as clicking a radio button or selecting an item from 
a drop-down list), it may be good policy to design the web pages as a dynamic form. If, however, 
some parts of the web form are unsecured and other parts require encryption, it is probably best 
not to use dynamic forms.
FIGURE 12.7
An example of a dynamic web page from an insurance company. If a user clicks on Add New Property, a new 
insured property box appears.
If “Corporate” is 
checked, the page 
changes to display a 
ﬁeld for “Company.”
If “Add New Property”
is clicked, a new
insured property box
appears.


===== BOOK PAGE 381 =====

CHAPTER 12  •  DESIGNING  EFFECTIVE  INPuT     381
A good example of a form that modifies itself may be found at Expedia.com (expedia.com). 
Clicking radio buttons for a flight, hotel, car, or cruise causes the form to change to gather the 
data appropriate to reserving a flight, hotel, and so on.
Dynamic web pages have the advantage of modifying themselves quickly, with fewer inter-
ruptions to send and receive data from the server. However, there are several disadvantages when 
creating dynamic web pages. One is that they will not work if JavaScript is turned off. An analyst 
must decide what to do in this situation.
If a person must use a website (as in a corporate intranet environment, in a site used to obtain 
student loans, or in the case of processing governmental or other transactions), the web page can 
state clearly that it will not function if JavaScript is turned off and then direct the user on how 
to turn it on. Most ecommerce websites do not require JavaScript to be turned on and have an 
alternate website for customers.
A second disadvantage when using dynamic web pages is that they may not be compliant with 
the Americans with Disabilities Act. (For more on web accessibility for all users, see Chapter 14 
on designing for human–computer interaction.)
Ajax
Ajax (Asynchronous JavaScript and XML) is a technique that works in recent web browsers. It 
involves the use of JavaScript and extensible markup language (XML). Traditionally, each time 
a web page needed data from a different database table, a request was sent to the server, and a 
whole new page was loaded. This is effective but slow because an entire page must be loaded just 
to provide additional data for a drop-down list, or some other web form control based on the one 
selected previously.
Ajax allows web developers to build a web page that works more like a traditional desktop 
program. As new data are needed, the browser sends a request to the server, and the server sends 
a small amount of data back to the browser, which updates the current page. This means that the 
viewer does not experience an interruption of work and the web page does not reload. The page 
is dynamically updated with the new data.
The data may be either a small text file or an XML document that contains many customers 
or other repeating data. If the data is an XML file, each customer element is called a node, and 
each node is numbered (starting with zero) from the beginning of the XML document. This allows 
the web page to go to the first or last customer or to loop through all the customers one by one 
with a button click.
Let’s say a systems analyst is designing a traditional website, without Ajax, for making a 
reservation for a European ferry. The resultant website might contain several pages. The first page 
would ask the customer about the origin and destination of the journey, the date of the planned 
trip, and the number of passengers. The number and ages of the passengers determine pricing, 
so a second web page would display asking for the ages of the passengers. A third would ask the 
type of vehicle desired for land transportation, and so on.
The same information may be obtained by using Ajax techniques, as illustrated in Figure 12.8.  
The same starting and ending destinations, as well as dates, are entered on the top of the web 
form. The web page uses the destinations and dates to determine whether there is any available 
space on the ferry. After the customer changes the number of passengers, the form dynamically 
changes to add the three drop-down lists for each passenger, along with instructions on the side—
without reloading the entire page. When the type of vehicle changes, in this example to Car, the 
selected vehicle type is sent to the server. The caption on the form changes the text from vehicle 
to Car Make. The server sends the possible car makes, and the Car Make  drop-down list is 
populated with the data. When the car make is selected, the chosen value is sent to the server and 
the Car Model drop-down list is populated, and so on.
The web page used in this example responds much faster than the alternative, which is 
having several different pages displayed, and it is easier for the user to work with. There is still 
a need to have a confirmation web page (although the page could dynamically change to remove 
form fields and replace them with text) and another web page for name, address, and credit card 
information. The analyst must decide how to partition the transaction into a series of pages, some 
using Ajax and some not. If small amounts of data need to be obtained to continue the transaction, 
and the data logically fits on a single web form or page, then using Ajax may be the best 
approach. At times it is better to use several pages, as when a user makes an airline reservation.


===== BOOK PAGE 382 =====

382    PART IV  •  THE ESSENTIALS OF DESIGN
FIGURE 12.8
When analysts use Ajax techniques, a dynamic web page responds more rapidly to short user input than it would if 
several different pages were required for display.
More questions
appear until the
form is complete.
After identifying all
four passengers, a
question regarding
a vehicle appears.
After the customer
selects four passengers,
the server generates
four drop-down lists.


===== BOOK PAGE 383 =====

CHAPTER 12  •  DESIGNING  EFFECTIVE  INPuT     383
One web form can obtain all the flight information, and another page can be used to display the 
flights. A third page might be used to obtain passenger information, and a fourth page might use 
Ajax to select seat locations, meals, and other individual needs for each passenger.
Ajax has the advantage of making the web work faster and providing a smoother viewing 
experience for users. The disadvantages are that JavaScript must be enabled and that the web 
page may violate the Americans with Disabilities Act. Security must be taken into consideration, 
if needed. There are numerous examples of Ajax websites. Some notable ones are Google Earth 
(earth.google.com) and Google Suggest, which responds to the viewer’s keystrokes by providing 
a drop-down list of possible search terms.
Using Color in Display Design
Using color is an appealing and proven way to facilitate tasks requiring computer input. 
Appropriate use of color in display screens allows you to contrast foreground and background, 
highlight important fields on forms, feature errors, highlight special code input, and call attention 
to many other special attributes.
Highly contrasting colors should be used for display foreground and background so that 
users can grasp what is presented quickly. Background color will affect perception of foreground 
color. For example, dark green may look like a different color if taken off a white background 
and placed on a yellow one.
The top five most legible combinations of foreground lettering on backgrounds are (starting 
with the most legible combination):
1. Black on yellow
2. Green on white
3. Blue on white
4. White on blue
5. Yellow on black
The least legible are red on green and blue on red. As can be gathered from these foreground and 
background combinations, bright colors should be used for foregrounds, with less bright colors 
for the background. Strongly contrasting colors should be assigned first to fields that must be 
differentiated; then other colors can be assigned.
Use color to highlight important fields on displays. Fields that are important can be colored 
differently than the rest. Take into consideration cultural norms. Red usually means danger, and 
“in the red” also means a company is losing money. Green means “go” and is a safe color in 
Western countries.
When observing web accessibility guidelines, take into consideration that 8 to 10 percent of 
the male population has color vision deficiency (CVD); often mistakenly called color blindness, 
but less than 1 percent of females suffer from it. Use other indicators such as text and position on 
the screen or device (in addition to color) to support users in completing their tasks.
Ecommerce has changed the world by asking users to enter their 
own information directly on web-based input forms; in doing so, 
ecommerce has increased the accuracy of data entry. Although this 
approach is efficient for the companies receiving data, it pushes the 
keying of that information to the user. Fortunately, software is avail-
able to automate the process so users can merely make a couple of 
clicks rather than typing in long strings of alphanumeric characters 
that make up IDs, passwords, and credit card numbers. On the Mac, 
1Password by AgileBits appears to be the current leader. LastPass 
is a good alternative.
1Password allows a user to automate logins, complete credit 
card information, and fill in an identity complete with street and 
email addresses. It has separate categories for saving bank accounts, 
membership, drivers’ licenses, and wireless router setups. Like every 
other good password program, 1Password includes important fea-
tures such as strong password generators, antiphishing technology, 
and built-in protection from keyloggers. It also offers a security 
audit called Watchtower that informs you if your passwords have 
become vulnerable. 1Password is also an app for iPhone and 
Android devices, so users can take their passwords with them.
MAC APPEAL


===== BOOK PAGE 384 =====

384    PART IV  •  THE ESSENTIALS OF DESIGN
As with any other enhancement, designers need to question the value of using color. Use of 
color can be overdone; a useful heuristic is no more than four colors for new users and only up to 
seven for experienced ones. Irrelevant colors distract users and detract from their performance. 
In numerous instances, however, color has been shown to facilitate use in very specific ways. 
Color should be considered an important way to contrast foreground and background, highlight 
important fields and data, point out errors, and allow special coding of input.
WEBSITE DESIGN
Some icons and navigational elements are so pervasive in website design that you may not be 
aware of them on a conscious level any longer. However, using these readily identifiable elements 
can help you give your web designs a professional look as well as communicate effectively and 
efficiently with users. We examine the hamburger icon, context-sensitive help, input validation, 
using a breadcrumb trail, and the concept of the fat footer to aid in the efficient and effective 
design of a website.
The hamburger icon or hamburger menu ( ) is depicted with three stacked bars that 
minimalistically resemble a hamburger patty placed inside a bun. The three bars are stacked 
together in a parallel position within a square, as part of a GUI. Place this icon at the top of a 
graphical display to alert the user that they can click on the hamburger icon to display a menu of 
the website. Using the hamburger icon can save space on the website, which is especially helpful 
when designing for smaller mobile devices such as cell phones.
Context-sensitive help for GUI design is a good way to help users as they progress through 
an application or a website. The cursor changes to a question mark as the user hovers over a word 
that is part of the context-sensitive help feature. Clicking on the question mark will bring up a 
specific comment designed to help the user with the feature they are currently trying to use. Users 
do not need to be connected to the internet to receive this help. Context-sensitive help differs from 
online help that users access by getting on the internet for in-depth help on multiple features in 
the software or to access Read Me documents that supply software details and troubleshooting 
on a variety of topics.
Input validation (displaying the item the user just typed in) is a way to prevent the user from 
entering the wrong type of data or incorrectly formatted data into the file or database. The design is 
such that the user is not permitted to advance to the next input field until the problem is corrected. 
At this point, the designer can add a message showing that the input data typed are not correct 
such as the messages a user receives in a Microsoft Excel User Form, “Amount box must contain 
a number” or “Date box must contain a date.” Consequently, the user is able to correct an error in 
real time, and incorrect data will not be erroneously stored in the database or file.
A breadcrumb trail is a colorful term for a navigational element developers can use to 
let the user know where they are on a large website, in a program, or in a complex document. 
(The phrase breadcrumb trail refers to the breadcrumbs dropped by Hansel and Gretel, in the 
fairytale of the same name, when they entered the forest in hopes that retracing the trail would 
help them find their way out of the forest to get back home.) You can enhance the user experience 
and improve the user’s perception of control if you include a breadcrumb trail to help the user 
navigate, especially on large, hierarchically arranged websites, such as retail sites. A breadcrumb 
trail on a subpage of a website can be displayed in a shaded bar at the top of the screen showing 
the path the user has used to arrive at that page, or it can be something simple such as a path—
Home>Help>Contact Us>Email>Live Chat—to indicate where navigationally one is on a website 
when a user is searching for help with a purchase.
The bottom of a web page is called the footer. A footer often gives basics of contact informa-
tion for the company, a copyright notice, or information about who to contact about the content 
of the website. Footers are often seen as throwaway designs of little importance. Their design 
should not be ignored, however. One current perspective is that by designing  fat footers, an entire 
section of the website can feature social media links, recommend what visitors should check out 
next on the website, add keywords and tags to improve search engine optimization, develop a 
lasting impression with users based on an excerpt from the organization’s mission statement, 
show a corporate slogan, display a key value, or even add humorous art or icons to reveal a more 
human dimension to the business.


===== BOOK PAGE 385 =====

CHAPTER 12  •  DESIGNING  EFFECTIVE  INPuT     385
Designing websites or designing for smartphones and tablets (see Chapter 11) share some 
guidelines with designing a good internet or intranet fill-in form. Now that you have learned 
some of the elementary aspects of input form and display design, examine Figure 12.9, which 
shows a fill-in form order page containing many elements of good design for the web. Guidelines 
include the following:
1. Provide clear instructions because web users may not be familiar with technical 
terminology.
2. Demonstrate a logical entry sequence for fill-in forms, especially because users may have 
to scroll down to a region of the page that is not visible at first.
3. Use a variety of text boxes, push buttons, drop-down menus, check boxes, and radio 
buttons to serve specific functions and to create interest in the form.
4. Provide a scrolling text box if you are uncertain about how much space users will need 
 to respond to a question, or about what language, structure, or form users will use to  
enter data.
5. Prepare two basic buttons on every web fill-in form: Submit and Clear Form.
6. If the form is lengthy and users must scroll excessively, divide the form into several 
simpler forms on separate pages.
7. Create a feedback screen that refuses submission of a form unless mandatory fields are 
filled in correctly. The returned form screen can provide detailed feedback to the user in 
a different color. Red is appropriate here. For example, a user may be required to fill in a 
country in the country field or indicate a credit card number if that type of payment has  
been checked off. Often a required field is denoted on an initial input screen with a  
red asterisk.
Ecommerce applications involve more than just good design of websites. Customers need to 
feel confident that they are buying the correct quantity, that they are getting the right price, and that 
the total cost of an internet purchase, including shipping charges, is what they expect. The most 
common way to establish this confidence is to use the metaphor of a shopping cart or shopping 
bag. Figure 12.10 shows the contents of a shopping cart for a customer making a purchase. An 
important feature of the shopping cart is that the customer can edit the quantity of the item ordered 
or can remove the item entirely.
Ecommerce applications place additional demands on an analyst who must design websites 
to meet several user and business objectives, including setting forth the corporate mission and 
values regarding confidentiality, preserving user privacy, and easy and rapid product returns; the 
efficient processing of transactions; and building good customer relationships.
FIGURE 12.9
The order screen from the 
Merchants Bay website  
(www.merchantsbay.com) is a 
good example of how to design 
an input form that is clear, 
easy to use, and functional. 
(Screenshot of Merchants Bay 
website. Copyright © 2000 by 
Merchants Bay LLC. Reprinted 
with permission of Troy Pappas.)


===== BOOK PAGE 386 =====

386    PART IV  •  THE ESSENTIALS OF DESIGN
Summary
This chapter has covered elements of input design for forms, displays, and web fill-in forms. Well-designed 
input should meet the goals of effectiveness, accuracy, ease of use, simplicity, consistency, and attractiveness. 
Knowledge of many different design elements will allow the systems analyst to reach these goals.
The four guidelines for well-designed input forms are the following: (1) make forms easy to fill in,  
(2) ensure that forms meet the purpose for which they are designed, (3) design forms to ensure accurate 
completion, and (4) keep forms attractive.
Design of useful forms, displays, and web fill-in forms overlaps in many important ways, but there are 
some distinctions. Displays may show a cursor that continually orients the user. Displays often help with 
input, whereas with the exception of preprinted instructions, it may be difficult to get additional assistance 
with a form. web-based documents have additional capabilities, such as embedded hyperlinks, context-
sensitive help functions, and feedback forms, to correct input before final submission.
The four guidelines for well-designed displays are as follows: (1) keep the display simple, (2) keep 
the display presentation consistent, (3) facilitate user movement among display screens and pages, and 
(4) create an attractive and pleasing display. Many different design elements help the systems analyst meet 
these guidelines.
The proper flow of paper forms, display screens, and fill-in forms on the web is important. Forms 
should group information logically into seven categories, and displays should be divided into three main 
sections. Captions on forms and displays can be varied, as can font types and the weights of lines dividing 
subcategories of information. Multiple-part forms are another way to ensure that forms meet their intended 
purposes. Designers can use windows, pop-ups, dialog boxes, and defaults onscreen to ensure the effectiveness  
of design.
Event-response charts help the analyst to document what should happen when events occur. Dynamic 
web pages modify the web page in response to events. These can be constructed as three-dimensional web 
pages. Ajax techniques request and receive a small amount of data from the server and use the data to modify 
the web page on the fly.
Several pervasive navigational elements can be used by analysts to give their web pages a professional 
look. These include the hamburger icon or menu; context-sensitive help for GUI design; input validation for 
input forms; a breadcrumb trail to let users know where they are within a large website, program, or complex 
document; and including fat footers.
Web fill-in forms should be constructed with the following seven guidelines in mind, as well as those 
in Chapter 11:
1. Provide clear instructions.
2. Demonstrate a logical entry sequence for fill-in forms.
3. Use a variety of text boxes, push buttons, drop-down menus, check boxes, and radio buttons.
FIGURE 12.10
The Merchants Bay website 
(www.merchantsbay.com) is a 
good example of a shopping cart. 
(Screenshot of Merchants Bay 
website. Copyright © 2000 by 
Merchants Bay LLC. Reprinted 
with permission of Troy Pappas.)


===== BOOK PAGE 387 =====

CHAPTER 12  •  DESIGNING  EFFECTIVE  INPuT     387
4. Provide a scrolling text box if you are uncertain about how much space users will need to respond to 
a question.
5. Prepare two basic buttons on every web fill-in form: Submit and Clear Form.
6. If the form is lengthy and users must scroll extensively, divide the form into several simpler forms on 
separate pages.
7. Create a feedback screen that highlights errors in an appropriate color and refuses submission of the 
form until mandatory fields are correctly filled in.
Keywords and Phrases
Ajax
base plane
breadcrumb trail
check box
color vision deficiency (CVD)
command button
context-sensitive help
controlling business forms
cursor
drop-down list box
dynamic web pages
event-response chart
fat footer
form flow
form values
hamburger icon
hamburger menu
hidden field
horizontal check-off caption
image map
input validation
layer
line caption
list box
message box
option button
picker
radio button
slider
specialty form
spin button
table caption
text box
vertical check-off caption
Review Questions
1. What are the design objectives for paper input forms, input screens, and web-based fill-in forms?
2. List the four guidelines for good form design.
3. What is proper form flow?
4. What are the seven sections of a good form?
5. List four types of captioning for use on forms.
6. What is a specialty form? What are some disadvantages of using specialty forms?
7. List the four guidelines for good display design.
8. What are the three sections useful for simplifying a display?
9. What are the advantages of using onscreen windows?
10. What are the disadvantages of using onscreen windows?
11. List two ways display screens can be kept consistent.
12. List three ways to facilitate movement between display pages.
13. List four GUI design elements. Alongside each one, describe when it would be appropriate to 
incorporate it in a display design or on a web-based fill-in form.
14. When should check boxes be used?
15. When should option buttons be used?
16. What is a “picker” in app development?
17. What are two different ways that form values are used?
18. What are hidden fields used for on a web form?
19. List four different types of events.
20. What are dynamic web pages?
21. What are three-dimensional web pages?
22. How does Ajax improve a web page that changes based on user actions?
23. List the five most legible foreground and background color combinations for display use.
24. What does color vision deficiency (CVD) mean? List two things a web designer can do to mitigate 
the effects of a CVD on the user.
25. Describe how a hamburger menu or icon functions on a web page.
26. How does context-sensitive help differ from online help?
27. In what ways does input validation improve the quality of data stored in a database?


===== BOOK PAGE 388 =====

388    PART IV  •  THE ESSENTIALS OF DESIGN
28. What is a breadcrumb trail in web design?
29. List five of the many items an analyst can include in the design of a fat footer for a web page.
30. What are four situations in which color may be useful for display and web-based fill-in form design?
31. List seven design guidelines for a web-based fill-in form.
Problems
1. Below are captions used for a U.S. state census form:
Name
                   
Occupation
                   
Address
                   
Zip code
                   
Number of people in household
                   
Age of head of household
                   
a. Redo the captions so that the state census bureau can capture the same information requested on 
the old form without confusing respondents.
b. Redesign the form so that it exhibits proper flow. (Hint: Make sure to provide an access and 
identification section so that the information can be stored in the state’s computer system.)
c. Redesign the form so it can be filled in by citizens who visit the state’s website. What changes 
were necessary in moving from a paper form to one that will be submitted electronically?
2. Elkhorn College needs to keep better track of students and others who use the many computers 
available in the Buck Memorial Library.
a. Design and draw a representation of a display screen for students to use in signing into the 
computers in the library. Label the three sections of a display that you included.
b. Many students access the Elkhorn Library collection online. Design a login screen so that students 
can log in remotely. In a paragraph, comment about how logging into the library system while in 
the library (part a above) is different from logging on remotely. (Hint: Consider different aspects of 
security as well as users who would like to use a browser other than the one used in the library.)
c. Design a paper form to be left alongside each computer that users who are part of the community 
(but are not students) are required to fill out daily. The form should ask for name, date and time 
of visit, general purpose for computer use (for example, word processing, web surfing, examining 
real estate documents online), and the time they have logged off. Label the seven sections of a 
form that you included.
3. Speedy Spuds is an organic vegan restaurant offering all kinds of potatoes. The manager has a 
30-second rule for serving customers. Servers at the counter say they could achieve that rule if 
the form they must fill out and give to the kitchen crew were simplified. The information from the 
completed form is entered into the computer system at the end of the day, when the data-entry person 
needs to enter the kind of potato purchased, additional toppings purchased, the quantity, and the price 
charged. The current form is difficult for servers to scan and fill out quickly.
a. Design and draw a form (you choose the size but be sensible) that lists possible potatoes and 
toppings (vegan cheese like vegan cheddar or vegan gouda, chives, onions, parsley, dairy-free sour 
cream, and so on) in a manner that is easy for counter servers and kitchen crew to scan and that 
can be used as input for the inventory/reorder system on the extranet connecting Speedy Spuds 
and Idaho potato growers. (Hint: Remember to observe all the guidelines for good form design.)
b. Design and draw a representation of a display screen that can be used by the servers and clerks to 
fill in the information captured on the form.
c. Design a display screen based on the display you designed in part b. This time, it should function 
as a display that shows a kitchen crew member what to prepare for each Spuds order. List three 
changes to the existing display that you made to adapt it to function as an output display.
4. LiveKindly Alternative Plant-Based Products, a regional plant-based wholesaler and retailer of 
alternative plant-based products as well as nondairy milk products, needs to collect up-to-date 
information on how much of each plant-based product and nondairy milk product it has in each 
store. It will then use that information to schedule deliveries from its central warehouse. Currently, 
customers entering the store fill out a detailed form specifying their individual orders. The form lists


===== BOOK PAGE 389 =====

CHAPTER 12  •  DESIGNING  EFFECTIVE  INPuT     389
over 150 items; it includes plant-based products available in different amounts. At the end of the day, 
between 250 and 400 customer orders are tabulated and deducted from the store’s inventory. Then the 
office worker in each store phones in an order for the next day. Store employees have a difficult time 
tabulating sales because of the mistakes customers make in filling out their forms.
a. It is not possible to have the solitary office worker in each store fill out the numerous customer 
order forms. Change the form (31/2 × 6-inch either horizontal or vertical) and draw it so that it is 
easier for customers to fill out correctly and for office workers to tabulate.
b. Design and draw a specialty form of the same size that will meet the needs of LiveKindly’s 
customers, office workers, and warehouse workers.
c. Design and draw two different forms of the same size to meet the purposes in part b because 
LiveKindly carries both plant-based alternatives and dairy-free milk products. (Hint: Think about 
ways to make forms easy to distinguish visually.)
d. Design a fill-in form for onscreen display. When a customer submits an order, it is entered into 
LiveKindly’s inventory system by any person who is serving customers at the counter. This 
information will be captured and sent to the central warehouse computer to help control inventory.
e. In a paragraph, describe the drawbacks of having lots of different people at different locations 
enter data. In a paragraph, list steps you can take as the designer so that the fill-in form is designed 
to ensure accuracy of entry.
f. Design a web page used by a customer to enter an order directly to LiveKindly.
g. Design a web page to obtain credit card information for a web order. Partition the data onto two 
web pages for additional security.
h. Design a three-dimensional dynamic web page that allows LiveKindly to customize certain 
products, such as requesting specific ingredients for a sticky tofu bowl or a Caesar salad. When 
the customer selects a product from a drop-down list, the ingredients must be displayed with a 
means of selecting which ones should be included in the product.
i. Design a fat footer for the web page you designed in part f. It should include social media 
links, keywords, references to additional web pages of interest, and a statement of key values 
LiveKindly holds, such as “Fresh is the key to our customers’ hearts.”
5. R. Ajab’s, a fashionable clothing store that also has an online store business, would like to keep track 
of the customers coming into the store to expand its mailing list.
a. Design and draw a simple form that can be printed on 3 × 5-inch cards and given to in-store 
customers to fill out. (Hint: The form must be aesthetically appealing to encourage R. Ajab’s 
upscale clientele to complete it.)
b. Design and draw a representation of a display screen that captures in-store customer information 
from the cards in part a.
c. Design and draw a second onscreen tab control dialog box that compares in-store customers with 
catalog customers.
d. The owner is having you help enhance her catalog business by setting up an ecommerce site. 
Design a web-based form to capture information from those who visit the website. In a paragraph, 
explain how it will differ from the printed form.
e. Design a social media post that depicts a customer’s positive experience shopping at R. Ajab’s that 
advertises the brand in a subtle way. Use visuals.
6. Recently, an up-and-coming discount brokerage house expressed an interest in developing its own 
web-based portfolio management software that clients could use at home on their laptops to make 
trades, get real-time stock quotes, and so on.
a. Design two input displays that make data entry easy for the client. The first display should allow 
users to enter stock symbols for the stocks they want to track on a daily basis. The second display 
should allow the client to use an icon-based system to design a customized report showing stock 
price trends in a variety of graphs or text.
b. Suggest two other input displays that should be included in this new portfolio management software.
7. My Belle Cosmetics is a large business that has sales well ahead of any other regional cosmetics firm. 
As an organization, it is very sensitive to color and introduces new color lines in its products every 
fall and spring. The company has recently begun using technology to electronically show in-store 
customers how they appear in different shades of cosmetics without requiring them to actually apply 
the cosmetics.
a. Design and draw a representation of a display screen that can be used by salesclerks at a counter 
to try many shades of lipstick and makeup on an individual customer very quickly and with a high 
degree of accuracy. Input from customers should be their hair color, the color of their favorite 
clothing, and their typical environmental lighting (fluorescent, incandescent, outdoor, and so on).
b. Design and draw a representation of a display screen that is equivalent to the one in part a but that 
vividly demonstrates to decision makers in My Belle how color improves the understandability of 
the screen.


===== BOOK PAGE 390 =====

390    PART IV  •  THE ESSENTIALS OF DESIGN
c. One of the affiliates My Belle has on the web is a large department store chain. In a paragraph, 
describe how the display screen in part a can be altered so that an individual can use it and My 
Belle can put it on the department store’s ecommerce website to attract customers.
d. Design a breadcrumb trail for the My Belle website. Make sure to include the names of key pages 
and show how a user could navigate between pages. Use shaded boxes at the top of the page to 
indicate the breadcrumb trail.
8. The YourNextProperty Realty Corporation specializes in locating homes for prospective buyers. 
Home information is stored in a database and is to be shown on an inquiry display screen. Design a 
GUI web-based display to enter the following data fields, which are used to select and display homes 
matching the criteria. Keep in mind the features available for a GUI display. The design elements (not 
in any particular order) are as follows:
a. Minimum size (in square feet)
b. Maximum size (in square feet, optional)
c. Minimum number of bedrooms
d. Minimum number of bathrooms
e. Garage size (number of cars, optional)
f. School district (a limited number of school districts are available for each area)
g. Swimming pool (yes/no, optional)
h. Setting (either city, suburban, or rural)
i. Fireplace (yes/no, optional)
j. Energy efficient (yes/no)
In addition, describe the hyperlinks necessary to achieve this type of interaction.
9. Design a web landing page for the YourNextProperty Realty Corporation display screen created in 
Problem 8.
10. Sludge’s Auto is an auto parts recycling center, including classic and antique cars. The owner would 
like to get his bearings on a website for customers to browse for parts. Design an Ajax web page used 
to find parts. The customer needs to know the make, model, and year of a car as well as the part. 
If the part is in stock, the description, condition of the part, price, and shipping cost are displayed, 
with the quantity available for each part, along with a picture of the part. Provide a button for each 
part that may be clicked to purchase the part.
a. Add a fat footer for the Sludge’s website landing page. It should include social media links, 
keywords, references to additional web pages of interest, and a statement of a key belief Sludge’s 
has, such as “The cars we drive say a lot about us.”
11. Design the Add Customer web page for Sludge’s Auto (see Problem 10). Include a profile that will 
allow Sludge’s to send the customer an email if a requested part becomes available.
12. Design the Purchase web page for Sludge’s Auto (see Problem 10). Assume that the customer has 
been added and has been logged on. Display some information about the customer. Split credit card 
information (type of credit card, credit card number, expiration date, and the security code found on 
the back of the card) between two web pages.
13. Design a web page using Ajax for registering an electronic product, either hardware or software. The 
form should have the purchaser’s name and address, telephone number, email address, and a drop-
down list of product categories. When the category is changed, send the category value to the server, 
which returns an XML document containing the products for the category used to create a drop-down 
list of products. When the customer selects a product, the product value is sent to the server, which 
returns an XML document used to create a model or version of the product.
Group Projects
1. Maverick Transport is a 15-year-old national U.S. trucking firm. Maverick is a less-than-a-truckload 
carrier. The people in management work from the philosophy of just in time (JIT), in which they have 
created a partnership that includes the shipper, the receiver, and the carrier (Maverick Transport) for 
the purpose of transporting and delivering the materials required JIT for their use on the production 
line. Maverick maintains 626 tractors for hauling freight and has 45,000 square feet of warehouse 
space and 21,000 square feet of office space. Maverick Transport is considering updating its input 
display screens. With your team, brainstorm about what should appear on input screens of computer 
operators who are entering delivery load data as loads are approved. Fields will include date of 
delivery, contents, weight, special requirements (for example, whether contents are perishable and 
require refrigeration), and so on.
2. Each team member should design an appropriate input display for Maverick Transport using either 
a computer-aided software engineering tool, a drawing tool such as Microsoft Visio, or paper and 
pencil. Share your results with your team members. Include small pop-up notifications for input


===== BOOK PAGE 391 =====

CHAPTER 12  •  DESIGNING  EFFECTIVE  INPuT     391
validation that notifies users that the data they are entering is invalid or that they have missed a field 
that requires data.
3. Make a list of other input displays that Maverick Transport should develop. Remember to include 
dispatcher screens as well as screens to be accessed by customers and drivers. Indicate which should 
be PC screens or displays on wireless handheld devices.
4. Design a web-based screen that will allow Maverick Transport customers to track the progress of  
a shipment. Brainstorm with team members for a list of elements or perform an interview with a  
local trucking company to find out its requirements. List what hyperlinks will be essential. How  
will you control access so that customers can securely track only their own shipments? Respond in  
a few sentences.
Selected Bibliography
Biskjaer, M. M., Dalsgaard, P., & Halskov, K. (2019). The same, but better: Understanding the practice of 
designing for incremental innovation in web design. International Journal of Design, 13, 89–104.
Demetri. (2012, June 4). 16 important do’s and don’ts of effective web design. https://www.designtoronto 
web.ca/dos-and-donts-of-effective-web-design/
Garrett, J. J. (2005, February 18). Ajax: A new approach to web applications. http://adaptivepath.org/
ideas/ajax-new-approach-web-applications/
Gube, J. (2008, December 11). 20 excellent websites for learning Ajax. http://sixrevisions.com/
ajax/20-excellent-websites-for-learning-ajax/
Ives, B. (1982). Graphical user interfaces for business information systems. MIS Quarterly, 6, 15–47.
Kyng, M., & Mathiassen, L. (1997). Computers and design in context. MIT Press.
Kyrnin, J. (2021, September 30). Pros and cons of image maps. ThoughtCo, Sep. 30, 2021, thoughtco.
com/pros-cons-image-maps-3468676. Last accessed May 24, 2022.
Nielsen, J., & Li, A. (2017, March 26). Mega menus work well for site navigation. https://www.nngroup.
com/articles/mega-menus-work-well/
Nielsen, J., Molich, R., Snyder, C., & Farrell, S. (2001). E-commerce user experience. Nielsen Norman 
Group.
Nielsen, J., & Pernice, K. (2010). Eyetracking web usability. New Riders Press.
Reisner, P. (1981). Human factors studies of data base query languages: A survey and assessment. 
Computing Surveys, 4(1), 13–31.
Schmidt, A., & Kendall, K. E. (2006, October). Using Ajax to clean up a website: A new programming 
technique for website development. Decision Line, pp. 11–13.
Turgut, B., & Karanfil, F. C. (2017). Appropriate terminology in the nomenclature of the color vision 
deficiency. Clinical Case Reports and Reviews, 3.
Wragg, N., & Barnes, C. (2021). Advancing interactivity: Graphic designers’ practice-based contribution 
to developing the web. Digital Creativity, 32(2), 143–164.
Zero Gravity Marketing. (2015, March 5). Website design: Fat footer pros & cons. https://zerogravity 
marketing.com/website-design-fat-footers/


===== BOOK PAGE 392 =====

392
Designing Databases
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Once you have mastered the material in this chapter, you will be able to:
1 Appreciate what a database is.
2 Understand basic data concepts.
3 Learn how to efficiently store data using normalization.
4 Know the guidelines for designing main files and database relations.
5 Grasp the notion of denormalization and why it is useful.
6 Understand the concept of data warehouses.
7 Comprehend the relationship of business intelligence to data warehouses.
8 Understand data analytics in helping systems and people make decisions.
9 Learn about data lakes and how they differ from data warehouses.
10 Gain basic knowledge about blockchains and their usefulness.
Some consider data storage to be the heart of an information system. The data have to 
be available when the user wants to use them. In addition, the data must be accurate and 
consistent (they must possess integrity). The objectives of database design include efficient 
storage of data as well as efficient updating and retrieval. Finally, it is necessary that 
information retrieval be purposeful. The information obtained from stored data must be in 
a form that is useful for managing, planning, controlling, or making decisions.
There are two approaches to the storage of data in a computer-based system. The 
first is to store data in individual files, each unique to a particular application. The second 
approach involves building a database. A database is a formally defined and centrally 
controlled store of data intended for use in many different applications.
Individual files are often designed with only immediate needs in mind, so it becomes 
important to query the system for a combination of some of the attributes; these attributes 
may be contained in separate files or may not even exist. Databases need to be planned 
so that data are organized for efficient storage and effective retrieval. Data warehouses 
are very large databases that store summarized data relating to a specific subject, so 
queries are answered very efficiently. Business intelligence is built around the concept 
of processing large volumes of data, sometimes called big data. Business analytics uses 
quantitative tools to analyze big data and inform decisions of managers and computer 
systems. Data lakes are repositories for raw data, normalized and unnormalized data from 
relational databases, and nonrelational data from the Internet of Things, mobile devices, 
and apps of all kinds. Data deposited in data lakes are not structured and predefined 
before they are collected. Data lakes can be queried simply to gain heretofore unknown 
insights into customers and their relationships to business goals.
13 
CHAPTER

