
===== BOOK PAGE 433 =====

CHAPTER 14  •  HUmAn–ComPUTER  InTERACTIon AnD  UX DEsIgn     433
UNDERSTANDING HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
Designing for human–computer interaction (HCI) means “ensuring system functionality and 
usability, providing effective user interaction support, and enhancing a pleasant user experience.” 
Furthermore, “the overarching goal is to achieve both organizational and individual user effec-
tiveness and efficiency. To reach these goals, managers and developers need to be knowledgeable 
about the interplay among users, tasks, task contexts, information technology (IT), and the envi-
ronments in which systems are used” (Carey et al., 2004, p. 358).
Knowledge about the interplay among users, tasks, task contexts, IT, and the environments 
in which the systems are used comprises the basis of HCI. The main tactic of HCI in systems 
analysis and design is to repeatedly elicit feedback from users about their experiences with pro-
totyped designs (which could be screens, forms, interfaces, and the like), refine the design based 
on the suggested changes, and try them with users again until the design is acceptable and until 
it is frozen by the analyst.
How Fit Affects Performance and Well-Being
Let’s begin our exploration of HCI with some useful definitions that are commonly shared among 
those working in the field.
Fit. A good fit between the HCI elements of the human, the computer, and the task that needs to 
be performed leads to performance and well-being. Just as it is important that new shoes comfort-
ably fit the shape of your foot, hold up during the activity you will be doing (such as running), 
and are made of a material (such as nylon) that is durable and cost-effective, so too is it important 
that the fit among the user, computer, and task all correspond.
Analysts want the best fit in their design. They want to make the best possible use of 
people in designing a computerized task that is intended to meet an organization objective. 
Better fit results in better performance and greater overall well-being for the human involved 
in the system.
Task. Tasks can be structured and routine, or they can be ill defined and without apparent struc-
ture. Complex tasks that require human, system, and task interaction are supported by ecommerce 
and web systems, enterprise resource planning systems, and wireless systems inside and outside 
the organization. In the foregoing chapters you have learned many methods to help you under -
stand, document, and graphically depict the tasks that people currently perform in the organization.  
listening actively is explored in a humorous way. As implied in the 
video, as a systems analyst you need to listen and show interest when 
working with users and teammates, to acknowledge key points, 
agree to listen to each other, and read reactions to your words. After 
you view the video, please reflect on the following questions:
1. What are some nonverbal ways to communicate that you are 
actively listening to a teammate or user?
2. How can you actively show interest in what a user is telling 
you during your interaction?
3. Describe some phrases that might be useful when you “agree 
to listen to each other” when talking with a user or teammate.
4. What is meant by “reading reactions to your words” in a con-
versation with a teammate? If you are receiving a confused 
reaction, what actions can you take to get the dialogue back 
on track?
SYSTEMS SCENARIO  
Listening to User Experiences
This chapter focuses on human–computer inteaction, the concept of 
usablity, identifying user interfaces, user experience design, dialog 
design, and giving feedback to users. In this video, the topic of 
To view the video for this scenario,  
see eText Chapter 14.
Seven Dimensions/Boclips


===== BOOK PAGE 434 =====

434    PART IV  •  THE EssEnTIALs  oF DEsIgn
You have also learned methods to help you design new tasks that will help people reach their 
objectives with the new systems you are creating.
Performance. The definition of the word performance in the HCI context is key; it refers to a 
combination of the efficiency involved in performing a task and the quality of the work produced 
by the task. For example, if analysts are creating data flow diagrams (DFDs) using high-level 
software or a computer-aided software engineering (CASE) tool with which they are proficient, 
the quality of the DFDs produced will be high. The performance is also efficient because ana-
lysts are using an automated tool with which they are familiar. They can work rapidly, with good 
results. The task fits the objective, which is to create high-quality DFDs to document a system. 
The efficiency of producing such diagrams with a CASE tool, which can then be used to store, 
retrieve, communicate, and modify the unified modeling language (UML) diagrams, is excellent 
compared to alternatives such as using a drawing tool unrelated to a data dictionary or drafting 
diagrams by hand, neither of which offers such features.
Well-Being. At this point, we introduce the concept of well-being, which is a concern for a 
human’s overall comfort, safety, and health; in sum, it is a human’s physical as well as psycho-
logical state. Does using a CASE tool for producing UML diagrams or DFDs on a computer 
serve the analyst’s well-being? Yes, because the task fits well with the analyst, the software, the 
objective, and the computer. Notice that analysts are working in an environment in which they 
are physically comfortable, are psychologically stimulated to be creative, and can be productive; 
also, each analyst’s work is valued by peers and clients, as well as being valued monetarily by 
the employing organization.
Psychological attitudes (the affective component) are important. How users feel about them-
selves and their identities, work life, and performance can all be gauged through assessing their 
attitudes. Analysts taking an HCI perspective are concerned with how attitudes color the way 
humans feel about technology and their tasks and whether their attitudes hinder or enhance their 
experience.
USABILITY
Usability is defined differently depending on which branch of science you are investigating. For 
our purposes in exploring usability through an HCI lens, we focus on usability as a way for design-
ers to evaluate the systems and interfaces they create with an eye toward addressing as many HCI 
concerns as thoroughly as possible. Usability studies (according to https://www.nngroup.com) are 
all about finding out what works in the world and what doesn’t.
Nielsen and colleagues (Nielsen & Mack, 1994; Nielsen et al., 2001) have published usability 
heuristics (or rules of thumb) based on thousands of usability tests of interfaces and, later, tests of 
ecommerce websites. They include visibility of system status, match between the system and the 
real world, user control and freedom, consistency and standards, error prevention, reconnection 
rather than recall, flexibility and efficiency of use, aesthetics, and minimalist design, help that 
users recognize, diagnosis and recovery from errors, and help and documentation.
Figure 14.1 shows a usability survey administered directly to users who have personally 
interacted with a prototype. It asks users outright about some important usability and ergonomic 
dimensions. Another approach is to write up use case scenarios for the system. These are helpful 
in examining usability concerns.
Designing for the Cognitive Styles of Individual Users
One important consideration is that data, particularly data used for decision making, need to be 
made available in different forms so users with different cognitive abilities can make sense of 
them. Some users may prefer to examine tables and make decisions, some prefer graphs, and 
others want to read narrative text.
Pivot Tables. It is possible that the same person might want different types of presentations at 
different times. For example, suppose a manager wants to compare inventory held at different 
stores in a region. A graph can present the data very effectively. A column chart can use colors to 
show when a store is near its stockout level, and it can also show the relative amount of stock by 
allowing the user to visually compare the height of the bars directly.


===== BOOK PAGE 435 =====

CHAPTER 14  •  HUmAn–ComPUTER  InTERACTIon AnD  UX DEsIgn     435
Suppose now that the same decision maker wants information about a particular store in a 
given month. The graphical depiction may have been set up to show the stores from highest to 
lowest inventory on a month-by-month basis. The user may prefer to return to the table that lists 
stores alphabetically, with the months listed chronologically. As you can see, the same person 
may want to see the same data in very different ways. Pivot tables allow users to arrange data in 
a table in any way they choose.
Visualization. Visualization is the representation of data as a chart, graph, or other image. Inno-
vative visual displays of data have existed for quite some time, even as early as the eighteenth 
century. Barriers to widespread use of visual displays included lack of imagination, the inability 
to draw graphs and charts in a cost-effective manner, and a lack of appreciation for such displays. 
Some charts are crammed with so much information that they become too complex for the average 
user. The consumer of information must be able to interpret the information in the diagram or it 
adds little value, so it is wise to use software to generate these charts and graphs.
Physical Considerations in HCI Design
In Chapters 11, 12, and 13 you learned the basis for sound design of screens, forms, websites, and 
databases. This included the special use of fonts, color, and layout design to communicate to users 
and to help them do the right thing with the input and output they encountered. To examine the 
underlying reasons for much of this design, it is useful to look at human sensory capabilities and 
limitations that will inform the design. In keeping with the HCI philosophy, an analyst should be 
able to compensate, overcome, or replace human senses to a varying extent.
FIGURE 14.1
A form may be used to survey 
users of prototypes on key 
usability and ergonomic factors. 
(Categories based on Zhang  
et al., 2005, Table of HCI 
concerns, p. 522.)
Please ﬁll this out after you complete your interaction with the prototype. Circle a number as you
respond to each question. Please hand your survey to the analyst when you have completed it.
Thank you for this important feedback.
1.  How well were you able to read the display or form?
2.  If audio was used, were you able to hear it?
3.  Did you consider the system safe to use?
1
1
1
2
2
2
4
4
4
5
5
5
3
3
3
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
4
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
5
3
3
3
3
3
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
4
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
5
3
3
3
3
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
Prototype being evaluated ______________      Version _____________      Date ____/____/______
Usability Survey
Human–Computer Interaction Factors
Physical/Safety Concerns
4.  Help you cut down on making errors?
5.  Allow you to recover from an error if you made one?
6.  Help you use it easily?
7.  Help you remember how to use it?
8.  Make it easy to learn how to use it?
Usability Concerns    How well did the system:
  9.  Was the system attractive?
10.  Was the system engaging (you wanted to use it)?
11.  Do you trust it as a system?
12.  Was it satisfying to use?
13.  Was it enjoyable to use?
14.  Was the system entertaining?
15.  Was the system fun to use?
Pleasing and Enjoyable Attributes
16.  Support your individual task or tasks?
17.  Help you to extend your capabilities?
18.  Make itself rewarding to use?
19.  Permit you to do tasks that the other system would
       not allow you to do?
Usefulness Attributes    How well did the system:
Very
Poor
Very
GoodAverage


===== BOOK PAGE 436 =====

436    PART IV  •  THE EssEnTIALs  oF DEsIgn
Vision. Systems analysts become accustomed to designing screens and reports for sighted people. 
The use of color, fonts, graphics, software, and PowerPoint presentations for displays and printed 
reports as input and output were detailed in Chapters 11 and 12. However, from an HCI perspec-
tive, analysts also think in terms of limitations on human vision. Factors such as distance from 
display to the person performing a task; the angle of the display in relation to the person viewing it; 
the size and uniformity of the characters; the brightness, contrast, balance, and glare of the screen; 
and whether a display is blinking or stable can all be designed to standards established through 
the International Organization for Standardization and other national and international groups.
Hearing. Humans have limits on the amount of stress their senses can withstand. Noisy laser 
printers, phone conversations, and shredders can lead to overload on human hearing. Office 
workers can wear noise-canceling headphones or use a personal music player, but these solutions 
may have the effect of isolating a person from the organizational setting and may even diminish 
their capability to perform tasks. Analysts need to consider noise when designing office systems.
Touch. When using an HCI perspective to evaluate the usefulness of keyboards and other input 
devices, systems analysts rate the human–computer fit as well as the dimensions examining the 
human–computer–task fit. Keyboards have been ergonomically designed to provide the correct 
feedback for a person doing data entry. Users know by the firmness of the key under their finger 
that the keystroke has been entered.
Designing for data entry using numeric keypads as the human entry device also provides a 
decision point for designers. Notice that numbers on your mobile phone are in a different order 
than numbers on a numeric keypad or a calculator. Your phone may be arranged with the numbers 
1, 2, and 3 on the top row. When you look at a calculator layout or a numeric keypad on your 
keyboard, you will see 7, 8, and 9 on the top row. Research now points to the superiority of the 
calculator layout when the user is doing a lot of data entry. However, the phone digit layout is 
supposed to be better for locating a number. Systems designers are constantly examining the fit 
between the human, the computer, and the tasks set by the organization.
Considering Human Limitations, Disabilities, and Design
All humans have limitations in their physical capabilities. Some are immediately visible, others 
are not. When designing from an HCI perspective, limitations are often discussed in terms of 
disabilities. The application of HCI to supporting and enhancing the physical capabilities 
of humans is one of the most promising application areas. Strides in biomedical engineering 
mean that there is research to support people who are blind or who have low vision, those who 
are deaf or hard of hearing, and people with limited mobility.
There are also improvements in the technical supports available to those who face difficulties 
in cognitive processing, including persons with symptoms of autism, dyslexia, and attention-
deficit disorder. Systems analysts are subject to the legal provisions of the country in which they 
are working. For instance, when designing for workplaces in the United States, you may want to 
check on the obligations of an employer on the Americans with Disabilities Act website.
One of the best ways to ensure the broadest possible accommodation is to begin designing 
from an HCI perspective. That way, your foremost concern will always be assisting a user in 
accomplishing a task, set by the organization, with the use of technology. When accommodations 
for people with disabilities are necessary, there are many sources to examine and many assistive 
devices to consider.
For people who have color vision deficiency or, more colloquially called color blindness, test 
the colors being chosen for screens or forms to be certain that they can be easily distinguished 
from each other. Particular problems occur telling the difference between red and green, for 
instance. Always design the screen or form with alternative cues, such as icons, written text, or 
audio cues that reinforce the content. For users who experience impaired hearing, make sure docu-
ments and screens include access to written versions of the audio material. Alternatively, design 
tasks in a way that headphones can be used successfully.
When designing computer tasks for those with limited mobility, think of speech input rather 
than keyboarding. In addition, new advances in biomedical engineering permit users with limited 
mobility to move the cursor on the screen by breathing into a tube or by directing the cursor to the 
desired spot on the screen by looking at that spot or even, in some highly specialized interfaces, 
by thinking about where the cursor should move.


===== BOOK PAGE 437 =====

CHAPTER 14  •  HUmAn–ComPUTER  InTERACTIon AnD  UX DEsIgn     437
Implementing Good HCI Practices
The ideal is to invite a usability specialist to serve on the systems development team with the other 
team members. However, many systems groups are quite small, and not many professionals are 
available who are involved in the practice of usability per se. Even if you make this recommended 
change to your project, the odds are that the position will go unstaffed or understaffed. However, 
don’t let that discourage you. You can take some simple steps that will positively influence the 
outcome of your systems project. Figure 14.2 provides a list of guidelines for taking an HCI 
approach to systems design.
FIGURE 14.2
The HCI approach to systems 
design emphasizes the fit among 
human, computer, and task.
Guidelines for the HCI Approach to Systems Design
•  Examine the task to be done and consider ﬁt among human, computer, and task.
•  Identify what obstacles exist for users in their attempts to accomplish their assigned tasks.
•  Keep in mind perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use of technology. 
•  Consider usability. Examine the usage environment by creating use case scenarios that
 depict what is going on between users and the technology. 
•  Use the information gained beforehand to ﬁgure out the physical and organizational
    environmental characteristics. Design with prototyping to accommodate diverse users and
    users with disabilities.
Start by listing about 20 different items of school-branded clothing 
for sports fans, including items such as hooded sweatshirts, T-shirts, 
baseball caps, sweatbands, running shorts, and so on. Many of 
them feature fanciful embroidered designs depicting their mascots 
in menacing or endearing poses. Hyde Park has their Golden 
Retrievers; Pierce has their much beloved bird, the Puffins; and 
St. David’s cheers with their Dragons.
Put the items into categories. Then think about what the data  
would look like. Does it make sense for Linda to look at the 
data weekly, monthly, or by semester? Will she want to look back 
five years to see whether there were any trends? Set up tables iden-
tifying the rows and columns and the content of the main cells. 
Suggest several tables so Linda can analyze them in different ways.
Now construct graphs that analyze the same data. Using some 
of the examples found in this book, suggest the type of graphs 
and show the data so that different users with different styles can 
make some decisions regarding the trend of sales over the last 
few years. Remember to compare the schools as well. Suggest 
the appropriate graphs from column, line, scatter plots, or even 
pie charts.
Also suggest three or four specific changes you would make 
to allow someone who has low vision to be able to read the graphs 
more easily. Magnification is one way to change a graph, but it may 
not be the best approach.
Consider the size of the schools because this may become the 
most important factor when determining how Linda Mascota should 
adjust her ordering for St. David’s, Hyde, and Pierce.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 14.1 
School Spirit Comes in Many Sizes
L inda Mascota manages the student-alumni clothing department 
for a large bookstore in Saratoga Springs.
“Our clothing sales depend not only on whether our sports 
teams win or lose, but the overall well-being of our students and 
alums. If they are proud of their university and want to show their 
school spirit, they’ll buy up everything on our racks!” exclaims 
Linda. “But don’t underestimate the weather as a factor,” she adds. 
“If the weather turns cold in October, you’ll see a surge in people 
buying warm sweaters, hoodies, pullovers, and gloves.”
“Our store serves the major three universities in our area,” Linda 
goes on to state. “First, there is Hyde Park, what we call ‘the foot-
ball school.’ They have about 17,000 students going there. They 
have high demand for school-branded clothing, particularly in the 
fall. Then, of course, there’s Pierce University. Pierce would like 
to be considered as Ivy League, so the students like to buy crew 
and lacrosse shirts. They have about 7,500 students. Then there is 
St. David’s, with about 3,000 students. They are devoted to their 
basketball team. You’ll see sales pick up in the second semester, 
particularly during March Madness.”
Linda continues, admitting, “I thought about asking the students 
what to stock, but an email survey is out of the question. I get 
spammed a lot, so I mostly don’t bother with email. Unfortunately, 
the lead time for getting official branded sportswear into the store 
is really long, and we run the risk of stocking out. But we try to 
never run out.”
You’ve been asked to design a set of tables and graphs that 
will help analyze the sales of the bookstore’s school clothing.


===== BOOK PAGE 438 =====

438    PART IV  •  THE EssEnTIALs  oF DEsIgn
Although we have been discussing the system in the abstract, it is important to recognize 
that the interface is the system for most users. However well or poorly designed, it stands as the 
representation of the system and, by reflection, your competence as a systems analyst. A well-
designed interface improves the fit among the task, the technology, and the user.
Your goal must be to design interfaces that help users and businesses get the information they 
need in and out of the system by addressing the following objectives:
1. Matching the user interface to the task.
2. Making the user interface efficient.
3. Providing appropriate feedback to users.
4. Generating usable queries.
5. Improving the productivity of computer users.
TYPES OF USER INTERFACES
In this section, several different kinds of user interfaces are described, including natural-language 
interfaces, question-and-answer interfaces, menus, form-fill interfaces, command-language inter-
faces, graphical user interfaces (GUIs), and a variety of web interfaces for use on the Internet. The 
user interface has two main components: presentation language, which is the computer-to-human 
part of the transaction, and action language, which characterizes the human-to-computer portion. 
Together, both concepts cover the form and content of the term user interface.
Natural-Language Interfaces
Natural-language interfaces are perhaps the dream and ideal of inexperienced users because 
they permit them to interact with the computer in their every day, or natural, language. No special 
skills are required of the user, who interfaces with the computer by typing or speaking a sentence 
or special commands such as “Schedule an appointment on Wednesday at 1:00 p.m. with Karla 
Salguero in marketing.” On an Apple iPhone, Siri is a voice-enabled interface that uses natural 
language. Alexa is a digital assistant used in devices such as Amazon’s Echo that can be voice-
activated. See the upcoming section on designing intelligent personal assistants for more on the 
use of natural language interfaces.
Question-and-Answer Interfaces
In a question-and-answer interface, the computer displays a question to the user on the display. 
To interact, the user enters an answer (via a keyboard stroke or a mouse click), and the computer 
then acts on that input information in a preprogrammed manner, typically by moving to the next 
question. Wizards or software setup assistants used to install software are common examples  
“I’d like to be able to make some comparisons myself. I could 
compare the turnover rate for all 12 of our warehouses. I’d also like 
to see how effectively the capacity of each of our warehouses is 
being used. Sometimes I’d like to be able to graph the comparisons 
or see a chart of them over time.”
In three paragraphs, compare three different types of interfaces that 
K. A. could use. Then recommend one interface for her use that takes 
into account her infrequent use of the PC, her enjoyment of working 
with raw data, and her desire to see data displayed in a variety of ways.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 14.2 
I’d Rather Do It Myself
“I can get Raj to download any data I need from the web or our 
server to my PC,” K. A. Sharman, an upper-level manager for Yum-
time Foods (a Midwest food wholesaler), tells you. “Getting data 
is no problem. What I don’t want are a lot of reports. I’d rather get 
into the data myself.”
K. A. goes on to tell you that as an executive she doesn’t use 
her desktop PC as often as she’d like, maybe only three times a 
month, but she has some very specific ideas about what she’d like 
to do with it.


===== BOOK PAGE 439 =====

CHAPTER 14  •  HUmAn–ComPUTER  InTERACTIon AnD  UX DEsIgn     439
of a question-and-answer interface. The user responds to questions about the installation process, 
such as which drive to use to install the software on the system or answers questions about 
customizable features.
Menus
In using a menu, a user is limited to the options displayed. The user need not know the system but 
does need to know what task should be accomplished. For example, with a typical word processing 
menu, users can choose from the Edit, Copy, or Print options. To utilize the menu best, however, 
users must know which task they want to perform.
Menus can be nested within one another to lead a user through options in a program. Nested 
menus allow the screen to appear less cluttered, which is consistent with good design. They also 
allow users to avoid seeing menu options in which they have no interest. Nested menus can move 
users quickly through the program.
GUI menus are used to control software and have the following guidelines:
1. The main menu bar is always displayed either at the top of the application (Windows) or 
the top of the screen (Mac OS).
2. The main menu should have secondary options grouped into similar sets of features. For 
example, on a Format menu you can format a Font, Paragraph, Document, and so on. 
Each of these will be a secondary menu.
3. Menu items that are unavailable at this time should be grayed out to signify that they can-
not be used at this time.
An object menu, also called a pop-up menu or context menu, is displayed when the user clicks 
on a GUI object with the right mouse button. These menus contain items specific for the current 
activity, and most of them duplicate functions of main menu items.
Form-Fill Interfaces
Form-fill interfaces consist of onscreen forms or web-based form-fill interfaces displaying 
fields that contain data items or parameters that need to be communicated to the user. Apps such 
as Jotform, WuFoo, and Typeform make it easy to design forms, but many of the form builder 
apps allow the designer to accomplish more. Figure 14.3 provides a list of possible solutions that 
can be addressed using one of the form builder apps that go beyond simply designing a form.
as she continues the interview. “Whatever you do, though, don’t 
slow me down. One of the things I’m most proud of is that  
I can still beat the other operators. They’re good too, though,”  
Ranhita adds.
Based on this partial interview with Ranhita, what type of user 
interface will you design for her and the other operators? Assume 
that even though the new system is improved, it will still require 
massive amounts of data entry from a variety of paper medical 
insurance forms sent in by claimants.
Compare and contrast interfaces such as natural language, 
question-and-answer, menus, and web-based form-fill interfaces 
in two paragraphs. Then choose and defend one alternative. What 
qualities possessed by Ranhita and the other operators—and the 
data they will be entering—shaped your choice? Make a list of these 
qualities. Is there more than one feasible choice? Why or why not? 
Respond in a paragraph.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 14.3 
Don’t Slow Me Down
“I’ve seen ’em all,” Ranhita Kulkarni tells you. “I was here 
when they got their first computer system. I guess I’ve sort of 
made a career of this,” she says cheerfully, pointing to the large 
stack of medical insurance claim forms she has been entering into 
the computer system. As a systems analyst, you are interviewing 
Ranhita, a data entry operator for AbundaCare (a large medical 
insurance company), about changes being contemplated in the 
computer system.
“I’m really fast compared with the others,” she states as she 
nods toward the six other operators in the room. “I know because 
we have little contests all the time to see who’s the fastest, with the 
fewest errors. See that chart on the wall? That shows how much 
we enter and how quickly. The gold stars show who’s the best each 
week. Performance measures are my friends.”
Ranhita says, “I don’t really mind if you change computers. 
Like I say, I’ve seen ’em all.” She resumes typing on her keyboard


===== BOOK PAGE 440 =====

440    PART IV  •  THE EssEnTIALs  oF DEsIgn
Forms for display screens are set up to show what information should be input and where. 
Blank fields requiring information can be highlighted. The user moves the cursor from field to 
field by using a single stroke of an arrow or Tab key. This provides the user with good control over 
data entry. Web-based forms afford an opportunity to include hyperlinks to examples of correctly 
filled-out forms or to further help and provide examples.
Form input for displays can be simplified by supplying default values for fields and then 
allowing users to modify default information, if necessary. For example, a database management 
system designed to show a form for inputting checks may supply the next sequential check number 
as a default when a new check form is exhibited. If checks are missing, the user changes the check 
number to reflect the actual check being input.
Input for display screen fields can be alphanumerically restricted so that, for example, users 
can enter only numbers in a field requesting a Social Security number, or they can input only 
letters where a person’s name is required. If numbers are input where only letters are allowed, the 
computer may alert the user via audio output that the field was filled out incorrectly.
Web forms can return incomplete forms to the user with an explanation of what data must 
be entered to complete the transaction. Often, fields with missing data are marked in red, and the 
user is required to complete the entry before moving on to the next web page.
Web-based documents can be sent directly to billing if a transaction is involved, or they 
can go directly to a real-time database if a survey is being submitted. Web-based forms push the 
responsibility for accuracy to the user and make the form available for completion and submission 
on a 24-hour, seven-day-a-week, worldwide basis.
Choosing and Evaluating Interfaces
When choosing and evaluating interfaces, keep these standards in mind:
1. The necessary training period for users should be acceptably short.
2. Early in their training, users should be able to enter commands without thinking about 
them or without referring to a help menu or manual. Keeping interfaces consistent through-
out applications can help in this regard.
3. The interface should be seamless so errors are few and those that do occur are not occur-
ring because of poor design.
4. The time users and the system need to bounce back from errors should be short.
5. Infrequent users should be able to relearn the system quickly.
Many different interfaces are available, and it is important to realize that an effective interface 
goes a long way toward addressing key HCI concerns. Users should want to use the system, and 
they should find it attractive, effective, and pleasing to use.
UX DESIGN
UX design (user experience design)  is a customer-first method for designing software that 
observes the behavior of customers and strives to enhance customer satisfaction and loyalty. It 
accomplishes this by improving usability and ease of use, but it also understands the customer 
must enjoy interaction with the product.
FIGURE 14.3
Many form design apps allow a 
systems designer to achieve useful 
solutions beyond the form itself.
Advantages of Using Commercially Available Form Design Apps Include:
• Forms can be developed easily using drag-and-drop.
• Forms can include logic jumps that automatically skip over irrelevant questions.
• Forms can capture photos and drawings and can accept payments.
• Output from forms can be used to create dashboards.
• Forms can be routed to speciﬁc ﬁeld staff or customers and be tracked.
• Forms can provide real-time notiﬁcations when someone completes a form.
• Forms can be integrated with services like PayPal, mailchimp, and Zoom.
• Form design apps can use responses from earlier answers in later questions.
• Forms can accept signatures.


===== BOOK PAGE 441 =====

CHAPTER 14  •  HUmAn–ComPUTER  InTERACTIon AnD  UX DEsIgn     441
There is a difference between user interface (UI or GUI) design and user experience design. 
UI involves designing for smooth interaction with emphasis on layout, menus, and buttons for 
input, and graphs, charts, and tables for output. UX designs are for users’ requests and needs, 
human-centered flow, and, most important, usability.
There are many contrasts and comparisons between a traditional approach and a UX design 
approach. The top layer of Figure 14.4 shows how traditional designers pull strategic objectives 
from top management to guide information systems development. The designer works with the 
strategic objectives as outlined, formulates a design for the information systems, and then pushes 
that design to the user who is often in middle or operational levels of the organization. The 
bottom layer of the figure shows the UX design approach. The designer interacts with users to 
gather their wants and needs, designs an information system after interacting with users and the 
proposed technology, then shares the resulting user objectives with management in the newly 
designed system.
Quality pioneer Dr. Joseph Juran said you could judge quality by whether a product can be 
used the way it was intended. This turns out to be at the heart of UX design. Usability means that 
a system is easy to understand, easy to use, and easy to appreciate. A few simple features, such 
as the ability for the user to save a password, might make the difference.
The UX designer considers these issues:
1. Have the user’s needs been met without any complications?
2. Does the workflow proceed without requiring any extra or duplicate steps?
3. Is the user able to complete the task without being forced to recall something from an ear-
lier step?
4. If the user makes a mistake, can it be corrected easily?
5. Is the interaction natural to the user?
6. Can the user be more efficient by using shortcuts?
7. Does the user feel in control of the system?
FIGURE 14.4
In traditional design, strategic 
objectives motivate the design 
effort, whereas in user experience 
design, the user motivates 
the design effort.
Designer
pushes design
to the user .
Designer pulls
strategic
objectives from
management.
Designer gathers
user wants and
needs.
Designer shares
user objectives
with management.
User Experience (UX) Design
Traditional Design


===== BOOK PAGE 442 =====

442    PART IV  •  THE EssEnTIALs  oF DEsIgn
To design the user experience, a designer first has to know about people. Although the 
designer doesn’t need a degree in psychology, the designer does need to have some knowledge 
about how people become motivated, what makes a person demonstrate loyalty, what makes a 
person happy, and how people make decisions.
In order to appreciate people more, the designer needs to gather information about people. 
This is covered in more detail in Chapters 4 and 5, and it requires the analyst designer to master 
interactive and unobtrusive methods, including both quantitative and qualitative approaches.
When trying out new features or redesigning the site, prototypes prove to be extremely help-
ful in getting reactions from users. This subject is covered extensively in Chapter 6. New designs 
can start with a prototype. Even user reactions to a nonoperational prototype can elicit lots of 
information from the user.
Having a group of users walk through the current system is another way to gather useful infor-
mation. If you ask the users to walk through a website and observe how easy or difficult it is for 
them to navigate the site, that is crucial information to their experience. If you ask users to use an 
app to perform a series of actions, it will show where the user stumbles, forgets, or gets frustrated.
When practicing UX design for websites, keep in mind the following 10 key adages listed in 
Figure 14.5. You will notice that each of the dos and don’ts encourage the designer to be observant 
of the user throughout the designed workflow and to be honest with the user in clearly delineating 
advertisements from actual content.
Five Designer Actions That Promote Good UX Design
Do Create Simple and Stress Free Sign-Ins. Do not require something out of the ordinary. 
Although having a user sign in using Facebook may yield additional data about the person, the 
individual may not want to give you that information. In the past, some games in the Apple App 
Store only notified users that a Facebook sign-in was required after they purchased the game. 
This was extremely rare, but the experience rattled many users who demanded their money back.
Do Make the Default Choices User Friendly. If you ask users whether they agree to send infor -
mation back to the company, make the default “No.” Observe all regulations in this regard as 
these can vary by country or region (for example, European Union rules versus guidelines from 
the United States). If you want users to have a good experience, don’t trick them by making the 
default “Yes.” Also, if you use colors, make sure green means “agree” or “yes” and red means 
“disagree” or “no.” Also, countries or regions differ on whether companies must show users an 
“opt-in” or an “opt-out” option.
Do Design to Specs that Describe the Majority of Your Users. Don’t assume your users have 
the latest hardware and software updates. Companies have gone out of business improving their 
product. They added features to the product but assumed that users had the latest hardware. Users 
whose computers slowed to a crawl were disenchanted and removed the product from their systems 
forever. One bad experience can change the destiny of the company developing the app or system.
Do Provide a Way Out. If you decide on a subscription model, make sure users can easily get out 
of the agreement. Often a service will begin with a free 30-day trial but collect credit card informa-
tion as soon as the trial starts. Before users notice, they are into the second month. If you want to 
have a good user experience, warn them that their free trial is ending. If they continue, make sure 
FIGURE 14.5
A list of dos and don’ts for 
practicing good UX design.
Do’s and Don’ts of UX Design
Do’s Don’ts
•  Do create simple and stress free sign-ins
•  Do make the default choices user friendly
•  Do design to specs that describe the majority
    of users
•  Do provide a way out
•  Do keep your eye on users
•  Don’t masquerade ads as content
•  Don’t block the user from seeing the
    content
•  Don’t ask the user for too many
    permissions
•  Don’t spring surprises at checkout
•  Don’t stop testing


===== BOOK PAGE 443 =====

CHAPTER 14  •  HUmAn–ComPUTER  InTERACTIon AnD  UX DEsIgn     443
they can stop their subscription easily. Consider giving them a link for ending the subscription 
when they first subscribe.
Do Keep Your Eye on Users. Users also change. They change their workflows, their preferences, 
and their hardware. Average users now look at their smartphone 150 times a day, but in a few 
years wearable technology may change these patterns. UX design is user centered, so above all 
keep monitoring your users and deliver a positive user experience.
Let’s turn now to five actions that UX designers should avoid so they do not frustrate or thwart 
users as they learn and continue to work with software applications. Keeping users at the center 
of UX design and properly empathizing with users who must learn new software will help you 
avoid these design don’ts.
Five Designer Actions to Avoid in UX Design
Don’t Masquerade Ads as Content. Interspersed between paragraphs on a website, there are often 
links that appear to lead to descriptions of products, other articles, or an offer to obtain more detail 
about a subject. Many of these are links to ads. The user feels deceived.
Don’t Block the User from Seeing the Content. A number of news sources block users after they 
have viewed a certain number of news stories per month, but that doesn’t lead to a satisfying 
experience. Even worse, some websites force users to disable an ad blocker before proceeding. We 
all can understand that websites need to sell ads to be profitable, but websites will have a difficult 
time attracting new users if they present the user with a bad experience.
Don’t Ask the User for Too Many Permissions. Asking users if they want to receive notifications 
as soon as they enter the site is unfriendly. Also, asking users to have access to the camera or their 
address book (or contacts) is poor design as well. If there is a legitimate reason for having access 
to the camera or address book, explain it at the outset.
Don’t Spring Surprises at Checkout. It is easy to find bargains on the Internet. Some companies 
will add unexpected costs or fees at checkout. These bad surprises can be extra shipping costs. If 
the item purchased is a service, or tickets for a concert to be held at the box office, “transaction 
fees” might be applied. Transactions will not be completed at this point if the user learns about 
unanticipated costs that are unreasonable or unforeseen. One online food delivery service in our 
area changed the default charge to include giving a driver an 18 percent tip. Because drivers do not 
do the same things servers in restaurants do, the delivery company upset many of its customers.
Don’t Stop Testing. Operating systems change. Make sure you keep up with the changes. If you 
allow information to be exchanged with other applications, make sure they still work.
We all realize that the company providing the website or application needs to make a profit 
or needs to deliver a message. Even so, when you adopt the principles of UX design, make sure 
users have a good experience. Avoid making users feel uncomfortable or awkward; instead, make 
them feel satisfied that they spent their time wisely in using the website or app.
UX Design Guidelines: An Ecommerce Example
Here are some good practices derived from UX design principles that can help in designing a 
successful ecommerce transaction:
1. Explain the shipping costs early and make them easy to discover. Allow users to see 
the types of shipping options (UPS, FedEx, USPS, and so on) and their typical costs 
before they check out. Include a dedicated tab so users can see how long shipping takes 
and the available choices.
2. Update the prices in a Save for Later area dynamically and provide a note to users.  
A change in price (either up or down) can remind users to act. Updates keep users engaged, 
reminds them they have merchandise saved in a cart, and spurs them to action.
3. Allow customers to remove items from their shopping cart or bag and to easily change 
the quantities of items in the cart. Several small buttons or drop-down lists can facilitate 
these actions. The addition of a button that says Edit allows ecommerce customers to change


===== BOOK PAGE 444 =====

444    PART IV  •  THE EssEnTIALs  oF DEsIgn
their order (choosing a different size or color, for example), a button that says Remove 
allows them to take it out of their shopping cart, and a miniature drop-down list next to the 
item in the cart labeled Quantity can let them change the quantity ordered incrementally to 
add or subtract items without going back into the original page that displayed the item.
4. Clearly indicate credit card fees and transaction fees. It should be clear to the customer 
how much the transaction would cost (certain credit cards or payment options may be more 
expensive than others). Also, if there are handling fees for any services, such as holding 
concert tickets at the box office, that should be noted as well.
5. Allow customers to continue shopping or proceed to checkout after an item has been 
placed in the shopping cart or bag. Once customers have added an item to their cart or  
bag, two options should be offered using two separate buttons: one that says Continue 
Shopping, another that says Proceed to Checkout. If these two choices are too stark, the 
developer can add buttons for Save for Later or Add to Wish List.
6. As customers move to the next page during Checkout, and before they enter payment infor-
mation, remind them of the transaction details. For example, for an online purchase of live 
event tickets, this reminder can include date and time of the concert, the artist performing, 
the quantity of tickets, their location, and cost. For purchase of clothing or other items, this 
screen should provide a summary of a shopping bag or cart (a list of items and total costs). 
Some shopping carts show a thumbnail of the item being ordered as well. Consider adding 
a 24/7 chat option to answer any questions prior to checkout so that the purchase will be 
completed. If a human is unavailable around the clock, you can develop a chatbot using 
one of several toolkits available, or even scale up to a hybrid that combines people and a 
bot, combining a high level of artificial intelligence (Heckstall, 2017).
Benefits of UX Design
If you base your design of ecommerce transactions on UX design practices, there are many 
benefits to gain:
1. Tasks can be completed more quickly by the customer. The organization of the 
ecommerce site will appear logical to the user, it will flow well, and the customer will 
be able to follow the flow of the process from browsing items, to selecting them, placing 
items in a cart or bag, returning to the website to make additional selections, exploring 
shipping and payment costs, to checking out with printable receipts, clearly posted return 
policies, and notifications of expected delivery dates.
2. More tasks can be completed in a given amount of customer time. At a website 
designed from a UX design perspective, the tasks to be accomplished online can be 
arranged efficiently, so customers needing an expedited checkout are supported (suppose a 
sale ends at midnight and they are still shopping at 11:55 p.m.) as well as those who want 
to take a more leisurely approach by comparing items and prices they have added to their 
shopping bag or cart over the course of a few days.
3. Task results can be more accurate. Customers will be prompted for information in the 
expected order, with some nonsensitive account information capable of automatically 
repopulating during checkout, so there is little room for transcription errors to creep into 
the transaction.
4. Less support is needed to address user complaints arising out of a poor user 
experience. Using UX design principles for ecommerce transactions means that the user 
is at the center of the online shopping experience. UX designers develop many different 
scenarios and paths through the website, all of which can end in a successful purchase. 
Having examined what can go wrong with the user experience and having sought remedies 
beforehand, poor user experiences become rare. The organization is free to devote more 
time to maintaining customer relationships and less time unraveling problems arising out  
of dissatisfaction with the user experience.
5. Users will complete the transaction rather than abandoning their cart and leaving 
the site. Designers have an opportunity to develop experiences that support the completion 
of the transaction in a satisfactory way, supporting numerous paths through the website 
and making checkout an option on every page. One encouragement to purchase added


===== BOOK PAGE 445 =====

CHAPTER 14  •  HUmAn–ComPUTER  InTERACTIon AnD  UX DEsIgn     445
to a shopping bag can express a reminder similar in tone to the Nordstrom shopping bag 
message that states: Popular items sell out fast. Adding an item here doesn’t hold it, so get 
what you love before it’s gone.
6. Customers will remain loyal and not seek other websites or software. If customers have 
a good user experience, they are likely to return for multiple visits. The interface is familiar 
and logical, checking out is efficient and pleasant, the customer is recognized, and the cus-
tomer has an account that can auto-fill many pieces of information to speed up checkout on 
the personalized pages. Many customers avoid setting up accounts on new sites and would 
far prefer to return to known sites that offer great user experiences.
7. The user will be more satisfied with the overall experience. UX design means that the 
customer is at the center of the website or software development. Looking at the ecom-
merce transaction through a customer’s eyes helps developers create an experience that is 
satisfactory from the start of the sign-on all the way to purchase and even through to mer-
chandise arrival and possible return.
DESIGNING INTERFACES FOR SMARTPHONES AND TABLETS
Smartphones and tablets open a new creative approach for designers. Touch-sensitive screens 
allow a user to use a finger to activate the display. The operating systems for these small devices 
use multitouch gestures (capacitive sensing featuring screens controlled with a human finger 
or a conductive stylus) for moving from one screen to another or from one state to another on 
the same screen. An example of the latter is enlarging a photo by flicking your fingers outward.
Gestures
Some gestures are basic. All humans start poking at objects before they know what a computer is; 
nudging and poking are inherent. It is also intuitive to swipe your finger from right to left when 
you need to turn a page when reading English, for example.
Using a pinching gesture to zoom in and out to shrink or enlarge a photo or to zoom in and 
out on a map is not intuitive. Once people learn it, however, they remember it. Somehow it makes 
sense to people.
Designers can take advantage of the fact that people easily adapt to new interfaces if they 
make sense. When you choose existing gestures or design new gestures for an app you are devel-
oping, make sure it is based on how most people prefer to use the gesture. Chances are that they 
won’t think exactly like you. You have thought about the gesture; they have not. They may not 
discover a designed gesture on their own.
On a desktop, arrow keys are used to go from one screen to the next and using a scroll bar is 
the common way to get to the bottom of a news story on the web. On smartphones and tablets, a 
swipe may be more logical when going from left to right and a tug may be the preferred way to 
look down further at an article or a list.
When a designer creates new nonstandard gestures, problems can occur. Suppose that a user 
has other apps that use a swipe from left to right as a copy command, and you develop a calcula-
tor app where a swipe from left to right clears the display. A user who owns an app that regularly 
requires the copy gesture will likely be upset by your adoption of the gesture for something dif-
ferent (and potentially destructive of data). You just lost a customer.
Then there is the temptation to take advantage of the latest techniques without really think-
ing through what the user would like to actually do. One example of this is the use of a motion 
detector that detects motion in three dimensions, called an accelerometer, to change something 
in the app by shaking the smartphone. Shaking is incorporated into apps for games, seismometers, 
pedometers, and apps that give biofeedback. In those contexts, the designer has made a choice 
that makes sense to the user.
Remember, however, that shaking is not an obvious or innate gesture. Although many users 
adapted to shaking their iPhone, fewer users wanted to shake their iPad. The size of the platform 
and the context of the app mattered. Also, shaking the iPhone may look odd at the office or on 
public transportation. If a designer still feels that shaking is highly useful for some apps, the 
designer should add an option for users uncomfortable with it. Pressing part of a screen or a button 
is subtle. Shaking is not.


===== BOOK PAGE 446 =====

446    PART IV  •  THE EssEnTIALs  oF DEsIgn
Designers need to think about the metaphor before programming a gesture simply because 
it exists. Urbanspoon (an app that located and recommended restaurants) introduced an app that 
allowed the user to randomly select a restaurant, using the metaphor of spinning a slot machine; 
however, some users might not think the gambling metaphor adequately reflects their quest for 
fine dining.
Remember, too, that every gesture needs to provide the user with feedback. If the user tugs 
and nothing more is in the list, it needs to appear obvious to the user that they have reached the end 
of the list. If the user turns a page, the designer should show motion so that the user understands 
that the page is turning. Feedback is discussed in the section “Feedback for Users.”
In Chapter 11, we discussed designing for both portrait and landscape modes. Make sure that 
the gestures are the same for both orientations.
Alerts, Notices, and Queries
Alerts, notices, and queries are forms of output on smartphones and tablets. An alert is useful if 
a severe thunderstorm is approaching, but if the user’s phone is on during a theater performance, 
the user may be asked to leave. Alerts can include a sound but remember that they do not need to 
do so to still be helpful.
Alerts are for critical information that the user needs to know in a timely manner. It is not a 
good idea to use an alert to tell the user that signal strength is low, for instance. That’s what the 
signal bars are for.
Notices convey information to a user. Some of that information, such as the notification that 
an update to the app is ready, may not be urgently important. In this context it breaks the user’s 
concentration, so a notification such as an update might be best kept as part of the app launch 
process but not used as an alert.
Some developers like to include queries  such as “Would you like to rate this app today?” 
This makes the designer seem less professional and, by including it, you could annoy the very 
people you are trying to please.
Always give the user a chance to opt out. Many users just do not want to be notified with 
information or alerts. Users can change their notification settings in the “Settings” area at any 
time, but it’s nice if they have a chance to opt out during the first launch of the app.
Badges
Another feature of smartphones and tablets is the ability to put “badges” on home screen icons. 
On the iPhone and iPad, these are little red circles that appear to be affixed to the icon for the app. 
A badge for the App Store signifies how many updates are waiting for the user to download and 
install. Some weather apps use a badge to display the current temperature.
Badges are good because they are an unobtrusive way to send a message to the user. They are quiet 
and passive, not loud and active like alerts and notifications. One problem is that they are ignored; 
another is that they may be outdated. (For example, the temperature displayed as a badge on your 
weather app may indicate the last time you opened the app sometime last week, not the temperature 
for today.) So unless you have something meaningful to convey, try to avoid using a badge.
DESIGN FOR INTELLIGENT PERSONAL ASSISTANTS
Intelligent personal assistants, also known as virtual assistants, are software agents that can 
accept commands written or spoken from users and perform tasks based on that input. They are 
not to be confused with personal digital assistants, which are hardware devices that were popular 
before introduction of the more capable smartphones.
Familiar intelligent personal assistants are Siri (from Apple), Google Assistant, Amazon 
Alexa, and Microsoft Cortana. In 2012 Apple introduced Siri, billed as your personal assistant 
that “helps you get things done, just by asking.” Users can speak to Siri in natural language, just 
as they would talk to a friend. Unlike older voice recognition systems, Siri does not need to be 
taught to respond to your voice commands.
Intelligent personal assistants have been available on smartphones for some time, but usage 
increased with the introduction of smart speakers that are connected to smartphones or computers 
via Bluetooth or Wi-Fi. Intelligent personal assistants can be found on desktops, smartwatches,


===== BOOK PAGE 447 =====

CHAPTER 14  •  HUmAn–ComPUTER  InTERACTIon AnD  UX DEsIgn     447
Facebook messenger, in cars and appliances, and even in apps (such as “Dom,” the personal assis-
tant within the Domino’s Pizza app). Intelligent personal assistants can recognize natural-language 
voice commands and answer questions. Some of the tasks they can perform are listed in Figure 14.6.
Developers can design for intelligent personal assistants using platforms such as Apple’s 
SiriKit, Actions on Google, or Amazon Lex. It is expected that intelligent personal assistants will 
continue to learn by using machine learning and other AI techniques.
Developing simple actions using application program interfaces is not that difficult. Complex 
actions will take some time to develop and must be continually maintained. It is therefore a 
strategic decision whether a company should design for use by intelligent personal assistants. 
Questions that need to be asked are:
1. Will the adoption of an intelligent personal assistant be consistent with our strategic 
objectives?
2. Will use of an intelligent personal assistant give our customers a better experience?
3. Will use of an intelligent personal assistant expand our customer base?
4. Which platform is most appropriate for our users?
5. Which voice should speak for our brand?
6. Can we develop our voice interface in-house or do we need to outsource it to those more 
skilled in designing voice interfaces?
Before the development team jumps in and starts developing an interface with an intelligent 
personal assistant, these questions need to be addressed. The six questions posed in the list above 
are all business-oriented questions. “Which platform is most appropriate for our users?” will have 
technical considerations, but a company first has to decide whether company values are consistent 
with hosting the intelligent personal assistant. For example, one intelligent personal assistant was 
recently scrutinized for privacy concerns. If customers do not trust the intelligent personal assis-
tant, would they trust your company and its use of that intelligent personal assistant?
The question “Which voice speaks for your brand?” can be rephrased “What should your 
company representative sound like?” Which gender should the voice have? Should its voice be 
recognized as originating from a certain country or region? Should it use youthful pronunciation 
and slang terminology? Should it explain everything or assume the user is knowledgeable and 
experienced? Much needs to be decided, and this requires input from executives, technical staff, 
customers, and potential customers before proceeding with a company relationship with an intel-
ligent personal assistant.
DESIGNING FOR VIRTUAL REALITY AND  
AUGMENTED REALITY
Virtual reality (VR) is an artificial, totally computer-generated world. The user interacts with 
this artificial world and in doing so is completely immersed in the experience through vision 
and hearing.
Augmented reality (AR) combines artificial elements with the real world. A developer 
creates images that appear to be realistic 3-D objects that can blend into the real world. The 
images exist in layers and allow the user to interact with the artificial objects.
FIGURE 14.6
Developers need to be aware of the 
many different tasks an intelligent 
personal assistant can do.
Some tasks an intelligent personal assistant can perform
Make phone calls
Change the room temperature
Stream podcasts
Change device settings
Get information about movies
that are playing
Search the internet
Set reminders and alarms
Order food deliveries
Take a picture
Interact with home automation
systems
Provide driving instructions
Music playback
Manage email
Lock/unlock doors
Provide trafﬁc, weather, and
news reports


===== BOOK PAGE 448 =====

448    PART IV  •  THE EssEnTIALs  oF DEsIgn
The uses of VR and AR are numerous. With VR, a developer may design a simulation that 
can be used for what-if analysis. In the event of a large forest fire, for example, during the 
VR simulation decisions can be changed to reveal different strategies and their results. With AR, 
apps can be designed to help the user decorate an office, locate a place to eat with coworkers, or 
practice navigating to a new client’s office in an unfamiliar city. Figure 14.7 shows how a user 
can use the camera of a smartphone to get a view of the neighborhood and then request a list of 
nearby restaurants. These restaurants pop up on the smartphone screen, indicating their location, 
their distance from the user, and even a food rating from 1 to 5 stars.
In designing for VR, the developer needs to realize that hardware advances will place a 
burden on the development team trying to maintain and update the app. VR hardware is currently 
relatively expensive. The application design must be of very high quality but, even then, the 
number of potential adoptions needs to be considered before launching into a project. AR hardware 
tends to be less expensive, and it can be successfully used on mobile devices such as smartphones 
and tablets.
Metaverse
Many systems analysts will eventually work in or for the Metaverse, but according to experts that 
realization is anywhere from five years to a couple of decades away. One useful definition of the 
Metaverse is from Ball (2021):
The Metaverse is a massively scaled and interoperable network of real-time rendered 3D 
virtual worlds which can be experienced synchronously and persistently by an effectively 
unlimited number of users with an individual sense of presence, and with continuity of 
data, such as identity, history, entitlements, objects, communications, and payments.
The vocabulary for the Metaverse is just like the Metaverse itself: gleaned from numerous 
virtual instances of work, experimentation, and games. Many of the words to describe interactions 
and technology in the Metaverse are already recognizable. These are some essential words with 
specific meanings that can help us discuss the Metaverse and its components (Combs, 2021):
Assisted reality. Any technology that allows a user to view a screen and use hands-free 
controls to interact with it.
Augmented reality (AR). The real world is the setting for AR, then computer-generated 
images are added.
FIGURE 14.7
A designer may add information 
to the image from a smartphone 
camera in real time, making this 
augmented reality experience 
more valuable to the user.
(Screenshot from ©FormEntry. 
© Copyright © 2012 by Widget 
Press, Inc. Reprinted by 
permission).


===== BOOK PAGE 449 =====

CHAPTER 14  •  HUmAn–ComPUTER  InTERACTIon AnD  UX DEsIgn     449
Meatspace. An attempt at a humorous characterization of the actual physical world where 
humans spend the majority of their time. Human flesh and blood. The opposite of the 
internet. The antonym for cyberspace.
Mixed reality. This has the real world as its setting, and then adds virtual objects that can 
appear and interact with users as if they are real.
Multiverse. Refers to many distinct spaces operating as separate entities in the context 
of technology, the internet, and social media platforms. Users can congregate to mingle, 
play games, and take advantage of ecommerce shopping. Familiar examples are Facebook, 
Minecraft, and Instagram. One theory asserts that the Metaverse could bring all multiverses 
into one space.
Virtual reality (VR). Provides users an immersive experience with the use of headsets. 
Games set in VR can feature completely different worlds and performing a training or 
examining an art gallery can use VR to interact with the actual world.
Notice that even though familiar terms like virtual reality and assisted reality come into play 
in the Metaverse, they are not its entirety. In brief, the word Metaverse is being used to represent 
a highly interconnected virtual world and the services it offers to users.
For the present time, learning of any type is the most applicable use case for VR. Examples 
include learning how to perform maintenance on a car or computer or learning how to repair a 
product. The Metaverse has also been imagined for use in hospital situations where knowledge-
able physicians are physically removed from their patient in another country but through VR can 
successfully treat them, and in surgeries where VR and reality combine to identify parts of an 
organ that need repair.
For systems analysts and software engineers the Metaverse holds challenging yet abundant 
employment opportunities. Indeed, so much so that when it is in the building phase, the Metaverse 
will face worker shortages. People are needed to standardize, engineer, deploy, and maintain it. 
This is where systems analysts and those with other technical specialties, such as cloud engineers, 
come in. Lack of skilled workers coupled with the immense computer power required to develop 
the Metaverse are both powerful barriers to the full flourishing of the Metaverse.
GUIDELINES FOR DIALOG DESIGN
A dialog is the communication between a computer and a person. Well-designed dialog makes it 
easier for people to use a computer and lessens their frustration with a computer system. There 
are several key points for designing good dialog. They include the following:
1. Meaningful communication, so that the computer understands what people are entering and 
people understand what the computer is presenting or requesting
2. Minimal user action
3. Standard operation and consistency
Meaningful Communication
A system should clearly present information to the user. This means having an appropriate title 
for each display, minimizing the use of abbreviations, and providing clear user feedback. Inquiry 
programs should display code meanings as well as data in an edited format, such as displaying 
slashes between the month, day, and year in a date field or commas and decimal points in an 
amount field. User instructions should be supplied regarding details, such as available function 
key assignments. In a GUI the cursor may change shape, depending on the work being performed.
Users with less skill in using a computer or doing their tasks with a computer require more 
communication. Websites must display more text and instructions to guide the user through the 
site. Intranet sites may have less dialog because there is a measure of control over how well trained 
users are. Graphics used on externally facing websites should have pop-up text or rollover descrip-
tions when images are used as hyperlinks because there may be uncertainty in interpreting their 
meaning, especially if the site is used internationally. Notice that European Union (EU) guidelines 
for the display of webgraphics requires that all images be labeled so visually impaired users will 
be able to hear written descriptions announced through special software. Status line information 
for GUI screens is another way of providing instructions for users.


===== BOOK PAGE 450 =====

450    PART IV  •  THE EssEnTIALs  oF DEsIgn
Easy-to-use help screens should be provided. Many PC help screens have additional topics that 
may be directly selected using highlighted text displayed on the first help screen. These hyperlinks 
are usually in a different color, which makes them stand out in contrast to the rest of the help text. 
Remember to use icons or text in addition to color coding to reach the largest number of users. 
Many GUIs incorporate tooltip help, displaying a small help message identifying the function of 
a command button when the cursor is placed over it. The machine side of communication is that 
the computer should understand what the user has entered. Hence, all data entered on the screen 
should be checked for validity.
Minimal User Action
Keying is often the slowest part of a computer system, and good dialog will minimize the number 
of keystrokes required. You can accomplish this goal in a number of ways:
1. Keying codes, such as airport codes when making a flight reservation, instead of 
whole words on entry screens. Codes are also keyed when using a command-language 
interface, such as a two-letter state postal abbreviation. On a GUI screen, the codes may be 
entered by selecting descriptions of the codes from a pull-down list of available options. 
This helps to ensure accuracy because the code is stored as a value of the drop-down list; 
it also provides meaningful communication because descriptions familiar to the user are 
selected. An example would be selecting a Canadian province and having the two-character 
postal code stored.
2. Entering only data not already stored on files. For example, when changing or deleting 
item records, only the item number should be entered. The computer responds by 
displaying descriptive information that is currently stored on the item file. Another example 
is when a user logs on to a website; the user ID is used to find related records, such as a 
customer record, outstanding bills, orders, and so on.
3. Supplying the editing characters (for example, slashes as date field separators). 
Users should not have to enter formatting characters such as leading zeros, commas, or 
a decimal point when entering a dollar amount; nor should they have to enter slashes or 
hyphens when entering a date. In general, websites are an exception to this rule because 
web forms do not include slashes or decimal points. Some web forms use a series of entry 
fields with editing characters between them, such as parentheses around an area code for a 
telephone number.
4. Using default values for fields on entry screens. Defaults are used when a user enters 
the same value in a screen field for the majority of the records being processed. The value 
is displayed, and the user may press the Enter key to accept the default or overtype the 
default value with a new one. GUIs may contain check boxes and radio buttons that are 
selected when a web form or a dialog box opens. Context-sensitive menus appear when 
an object is clicked with the right mouse button. These menus contain options specific to 
the object under the mouse.
5. Designing an inquiry (or change or delete) program so that the user needs to enter 
only the first few characters of a name or item description. The program displays a list 
of all matching names and, when the user chooses one, the matching record is displayed.
6. Providing keystrokes for selecting pull-down menu options. Often, these options 
are selected using a mouse, followed by keying. Users must move their hands from the 
keyboard to the mouse and back. As users become familiar with the system, shortcut 
keystrokes provide a faster method for manipulating the pull-down menus because both 
hands remain on the keyboard. This helps users become efficient at their tasks. On a PC or 
Mac, keystrokes usually involve pressing a function key or the Alt key followed by a letter 
or another key. Figure 14.8 shows an example of nested pull-down menus.
7. Using radio buttons and drop-down lists to control displays of new web pages or to 
change web forms. For example, when a radio button is clicked, a drop-down list may 
change to reflect the radio button choice. A radio button may be clicked, and a form  
may change according to the choice. A drop-down list may change or a radio button may 
be clicked to move to a new web page. Drop-down lists are often provided on a web page 
for quick navigation; selecting a new web page from the drop-down list takes the viewer 
to that page.


===== BOOK PAGE 451 =====

CHAPTER 14  •  HUmAn–ComPUTER  InTERACTIon AnD  UX DEsIgn     451
8. Providing cursor control for web forms and other displays so the cursor moves to the 
next field when the right number of characters has been entered. An example would be 
when a user enters an area code for a U.S. telephone number: the cursor moves to the local 
phone number field following entry of the first three characters. Entering software registra-
tion key codes is another example. The codes are often in groups of four or five letters, the 
cursor moves to the next field when the first field is filled, and so on. The analyst should 
examine every field to see whether automatic cursor control should occur.
Any combination of these eight approaches can help the analyst decrease the number of 
keystrokes required by the user, thereby speeding up data entry and minimizing errors.
FIGURE 14.8
Example of nested pull-down 
menus with shortcut keys from 
Microsoft Visio Professional. 
(Used with permission from 
Microsoft)
I was before. If it doesn’t save data, I’m still returned to where I 
was before. It’s confusing, and I never know what to do. There’s 
nothing on the display screen that tells me what to do next. See the 
little manual that came with it? It’s dog-eared because we have to 
keep thumbing through it trying to figure out what to do next. Or 
we go online to try to get some help, but their technical assistance 
is just about nonexistent. They have a phone line, but it takes way 
too much time too.”
Based on what you’ve heard in the interview, take this opportu-
nity to supplement the software by designing some onscreen feed-
back for Owen and his sales team. The feedback should address all 
of Owen’s concerns and follow the guidelines for giving feedback 
to users and for designing good displays. Draw a prototype of the 
displays you think are necessary to address the problems Owen lists.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 14.4 
Waiting to Be Fed
“Yeah, we were sold a package all right. This one right here. 
Don’t get me wrong, it gets the work done. We just don’t know 
when.”
You are talking with Owen Itt, who is telling you about the sales 
unit’s recent purchase of new software for its networked PCs that 
allows the input of sales data for each of its 16 salespeople, provides 
output showing comparison data for them, and projects future sales 
based on past sales records.
“We’ve had some odd experiences with this program, though,” 
Owen continues. “It seems slow or something. For instance, we’re 
never sure when it’s done. I type in a command to open a file and 
nothing happens. About half a minute later, if I’m lucky, the display 
I want might come up, but I’m never sure. If I ask it to save sales 
data, I just get a whirring sound. If it works, I’m returned to where


===== BOOK PAGE 452 =====

452    PART IV  •  THE EssEnTIALs  oF DEsIgn
Standard Operation and Consistency
A system should be consistent throughout its different displays and in the mechanisms for control-
ling the operation of the displays throughout different applications. Consistency makes it easier for 
users to learn how to use new portions of the system once they are familiar with one component. 
You can achieve consistency by:
1. Locating titles, date, time, and operator and feedback messages in the same places on all 
displays.
2. Exiting each program by using the same key or menu option.
3. Canceling a transaction in a consistent way, such as using the Esc key.
4. Obtaining help in a standardized way, such as using a function key.
5. Standardizing the colors used for all displays or web pages.
6. Standardizing the use of icons for similar operations when using a GUI.
7. Using consistent terminology in a display screen or website.
8. Providing a consistent way to navigate through the dialog.
9. Using consistent font alignment, size, and color on web pages.
FEEDBACK FOR USERS
All systems require feedback to monitor and change behavior. Feedback usually compares current 
behavior with predetermined goals and gives back information describing the gap between actual 
and intended performance.
Because humans themselves are complex systems, they require feedback from others to meet 
the psychological and cognitive processing needs discussed earlier in this chapter. Feedback also 
increases human confidence. How much feedback is required is an individual characteristic.
When users interface with machines, they still need feedback about how their work is pro-
gressing. As designers of user interfaces, systems analysts need to be aware of the human need 
for feedback and build it into the system. In addition to text messages, icons can often be used. 
For example, displaying an hourglass while the system is processing encourages the user to wait 
a while rather than repeatedly pressing keys to get a response.
Types of Feedback
Feedback to a user from a system is necessary in seven distinct situations. Feedback that is ill 
timed or too plentiful is not helpful because humans possess a limited capacity to process infor -
mation. Websites should display a status message or some other way of notifying the user that the 
site is responding and that input is either correct or in need of further information. Figure 14.9 
provides some examples for each type of feedback.
FIGURE 14.9
Feedback can take many forms.
Acknowledging acceptance of input “Your payment has been processed.”
Recognizing that input is in the correct form An LED-like display turns from red to green.
Explaining a delay in processing An hourglass or a rotating circle.
Notifying that input is not in the correct form “The telephone number should be separated
by dashes (-).”
Acknowledging that a request is completed “You successfully renewed your membership.
Thank you.”
Offering the user more detailed feedback
“Your credit card was not charged. You must
enter a valid expiry date. Press help if you need
more information.”
Notifying that a request was not completed “Your attempt was not successful. Please try
at a later time.”
Sample Feedback ResponseType of Feedback


===== BOOK PAGE 453 =====

CHAPTER 14  •  HUmAn–ComPUTER  InTERACTIon AnD  UX DEsIgn     453
Acknowledging Acceptance of Input. The first situation in which users need feedback is to learn 
that the computer has accepted the input. For example, when a user enters a name on a line, the 
computer provides feedback to the user by advancing the cursor one character at a time when 
the letters are entered correctly. A web example would be a web page displaying this message: 
“Your payment has been processed. Your confirmation number is 1234567. Thank you for  
your payment.”
Recognizing that Input Is in the Correct Form. Users need feedback to tell them that the input is 
in the correct form. For example, a user inputs a command, and the feedback states “READY” 
as the program progresses to a new point. A poor example of feedback that tells the user that input 
is in the correct form is the message “INPUT OK.” That message takes extra space, is cryptic, and 
does nothing to encourage the input of more data. When placing an order on the web or making an 
online payment, a confirmation page often displays, requesting that the user review the informa-
tion and click a button or image to confirm the order or payment.
Notifying that Input Is Not in the Correct Form. Feedback is necessary to warn users that input is 
not in the correct form. If a user enters a phone number incorrectly, the software or website needs 
to let the user know that. Caution must be used so that the error messages are bold enough for 
the user to notice. A small red line of text may go unnoticed. An analyst must decide whether to 
detect and report errors when a Submit button or link is clicked, called batch validation, or detect 
errors one at a time, such as when a user enters a month of 14 and leaves the field. The second 
method is a riskier approach because poor coding may put the browser into a loop, and the user 
will have to shut down the browser.
Additional feedback that tells the user that the input is not in the correct form might be to not 
permit the user to advance to the next field or screen, along with an appropriate pop-up message 
explaining what is wrong and supplying instructions on how to correct it.
Audio also has been used to inform a user that something was entered incorrectly, but audio 
feedback alone is not very descriptive, so it is not as helpful to users as onscreen instructions. 
Use audio feedback sparingly, perhaps to denote urgent situations. The same advice applies to the 
design of websites, which may be viewed in an open office where sounds carry and a coworker’s 
desktop speakers are within earshot of several other people.
Explaining a Delay in Processing. One of the most important kinds of feedback informs the user 
that there will be a delay in processing the request. Delays longer than 10 seconds or so require 
feedback so that the user knows the system is still working.
When new software is being installed, a short tutorial on the new application may be run 
during delays, which is meant to serve as a distraction rather than feedback about the installation. 
A list of files that are being copied and a status bar often are used to reassure the user that the 
system is functioning properly. Web browsers usually display the web pages that are being loaded 
and the time remaining.
Acknowledging that a Request Is Completed. Users need to know when their request has been 
completed and new requests may be input. A specific feedback message may be displayed when 
an action has been completed by a user, such as “Employee record has been added,” “Customer 
record has been changed,” or “Item number 12345 has been deleted.”
Notifying that a Request Was not Completed. Feedback is needed to let the user know that the 
computer is unable to complete a request. If the display reads “Unable to process request. Check 
request again,” the user can go back and check to see whether the request has been input correctly 
rather than continue to enter commands that cannot be executed.
Offering the User More Detailed Feedback. Users need to be reassured that more detailed feed-
back is available, and they should be shown how they can get it. Commands such as Assist, 
Instruct, Explain, and More may be employed. Or the user may type a question mark or click on 
an appropriate icon to get more feedback. Using the command Help as a way to obtain further 
information has been questioned because users may feel helpless or caught in a trap from which 
they must escape. However, this convention is in widespread use, and its familiarity to users may 
overcome this concern.


===== BOOK PAGE 454 =====

454    PART IV  •  THE EssEnTIALs  oF DEsIgn
When designing web interfaces, hyperlinks can be embedded to allow the user to jump to 
the relevant help screens or to view more information. Hyperlinks are typically highlighted with 
underlining, italics, or a different color. Hyperlinks can be graphics, text, or icons.
Including Feedback in Design
If used correctly, feedback can be a powerful reinforcer of user learning processes, serve to 
improve user performance with the system, increase motivation to produce, and improve the fit 
among the user, the task, and the technology.
A Variety of Help Options. Feedback on personal computers has developed over the years. “Help” 
originally started as a response to the user who pressed a function key, such as F1; the GUI alterna-
tive is the pull-down Help menu. This approach was cumbersome because end users had to navi-
gate through a table of contents or search via an index. Next came context-sensitive help. Users 
could simply click on the right mouse button, and topics or explanations about the current screen 
or area of the screen would be revealed. A third type of help on personal computers occurs when 
the user places the arrow over an icon and leaves it there for a couple of seconds. At this point, 
some programs pop up a balloon similar to those found in comic strips. This balloon explains a 
little bit about the icon function.
The fourth type of help is a wizard, which asks the user a series of questions and then takes 
action accordingly. Wizards help users through complicated or unfamiliar processes such as setting 
up network connections or booking an airline seat online. Most users are familiar with wizards 
through creating a PowerPoint presentation or choosing a style for a memo they are writing in 
Microsoft Word.
Besides building help into an application, software manufacturers offer online help (either 
automated or personalized with live chat or chatbots) or help lines (most customer service 
telephone lines are not toll free, however). Some commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) software 
manufacturers offer an email contact page where users can fill out a form stating the problem 
they are experiencing, and they will be emailed or phoned back, or a live chat will be opened to 
address the technical problem.
Finally, users can seek and find support from other users through software forums. This type 
of support is, of course, unofficial, and the information obtained may be true, partially true, or 
misleading. Approach any software fixes posted on bulletin boards, blogs, discussion groups, 
or chat rooms with wariness and skepticism. The principles regarding the use of software forums 
are the same as those for folklore and recommendation systems, discussed in Chapter 16.
Besides informal help on software, vendor websites are extremely useful for updating drivers,  
viewers, and the software itself. Most online computer publications have some sort of “driver watch” 
or “bug report” that monitors support forums, blogs, and websites for useful programs that can 
be downloaded. Programs will forage vendor websites for the latest updates, inform the user of 
them, assist with downloads, and upgrade user applications.
SPECIAL DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS FOR ECOMMERCE
Many of the user interface design principles you have learned concerning feedback also extend 
to designing ecommerce websites. A few extra considerations discussed in this section can give 
your web interface designs improved functionality.
Soliciting Feedback from Ecommerce Website Customers
You need to give users feedback about what is happening with an order, but you need to elicit 
feedback as well. Most ecommerce websites have a Feedback button. There are two standard 
ways to design what users will experience when they click on the Feedback button.
The first way is to launch the user’s email program with the email address of the company’s 
contact automatically entered into the To: field. This method prevents typing errors and facilitates 
ease in contacting the organization. The user does not need to leave the site to communicate with 
the company.
These messages, however, raise expectations that they will be answered just as regular mail 
or phone calls are. Research indicates that 60 percent of organizations with this type of email


===== BOOK PAGE 455 =====

CHAPTER 14  •  HUmAn–ComPUTER  InTERACTIon AnD  UX DEsIgn     455
contact feature on their sites do not have anyone assigned to reply to the email messages received. 
These businesses lose valuable feedback, allow customers to harbor the impression that they are 
communicating, and engender ill will when they provide no response. If you design this type of 
feedback opportunity, you also need to design procedures for the organization to reply to email 
from the website. Some designers handle this problem by creating systems to automatically return 
an email reply, which generates a unique case or incident number, provides further instructions 
on how to proceed (hyperlinks to FAQ pages perhaps), or offers phone numbers to help lines that 
are unavailable to the general public.
The second type of design for garnering feedback from customers using an ecommerce web-
site is to take users to a blank message template when they click on Feedback. Some web creation 
tools permit you to create and insert a feedback form into your site easily. This form might begin 
with a header that states “Company X Feedback” and then “You can use the form below to send 
suggestions, comments, and questions about the X site to our Customer Service team.”
Vita continues by moving to the computer keyboard and saying, 
“Let me show you some good sites.” As she types in the first URL, 
the group sees the site projected. “They use chat systems from 
LiveChat,” she continues.
“Customers also need to search for more information about a 
product or manufacturer,” Al adds. “Let’s make it easier for them. 
Let’s look at a different city for an example. Some of those city 
websites use Google to search for information.”
After listening intently, Bill speaks up. “Medical information 
could also be useful,” he says. “I’ve noticed that some websites 
show medical news from Acquire Media. I’ve seen people on the 
treadmills at my health and fitness center watching the financial 
channels while they exercise.”
“While we’re at it, why don’t we add news and financial infor-
mation to the website?” Ginger asks. “I notice that a company called 
Thomson Reuters appears often as a provider.”
Think about the conversation between the systems develop-
ment team and the people from Marathon Vitamin Shops. Some 
of the enhancement suggestions involved taking advantage of free 
services; others required payments ranging from $1,000 to $5,000 
annually. Although some were good ideas, others may not have been 
practical or feasible. Perhaps some of the ideas just do not make 
sense for the company.
For each of the following, review what you know about the 
mission and business activities of Marathon Vitamin Shops. Then 
make a recommendation regarding each option the analysts and 
clients have made and defend it:
• Mashups using Google Maps
• Chat rooms and social media links
• Blogs by users and also those written by Marathon Vitamin 
employees
• Search engines
• Medical information (preventive medicine and medical 
breakthroughs)
• Newsfeeds and financial markets information
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 14.5 
When You Run a Marathon, It Helps to Know Where You’re Going
M arathon Vitamin Shops was successful in getting its website 
up and running. The web developers put the company’s entire 
catalog online and included a choice of skins (or personas, as 
they are called in the Firefox browser) so each type of customer 
would enjoy using the website. (See Consulting Opportunity 1.1 
for more details.)
The analysts are meeting with owner Bill Berry and some 
employees to evaluate customer feedback as well as give their own 
reactions to the new website. They are meeting in a large conference 
room where they have a computer with internet access and a projector. 
As they sit down at the table, the entry screen for the website is 
projected at the front of the room. “The website has attracted lots of 
attention, but we want to give the customers even more so that they 
keep coming back,” says Bill, gesturing to the screen.
He continues, “It’s not like we’re closing our retail stores or 
anything. In fact, it’s just the opposite. When customers notice we’re 
on the web, they’re eager to locate the store in their community. 
They want to be able to walk into a store and talk to a trained expert 
rather than buying everything on the web. We need to tell people 
how to get there.”
“We think we can improve the site by adding special enhance-
ments and features,” says Al Falfa, a member of the systems team 
who originally developed and implemented the ecommerce website.
“Yes,” says Ginger Rute, one of the other members of 
the systems development team, as she nods in agreement. “The 
university uses a mapping facility from MapQuest, and Home Depot 
uses Bing Maps,”
Vita Ming, another member of the original systems development 
team, speaks up enthusiastically, saying, “We know of a couple good 
social media sites we can link to and chat rooms we can add to our 
website. We think they can improve the stickiness of the site, making 
people stay on the site longer and also making them want to return.”
“That’s a great idea,” says Jin Singh, one of the technologically 
savvy Marathon employees. “We can let customers talk with one 
another, tell each other about a product they liked, and so on. We 
could even let them start their own blogs.”


===== BOOK PAGE 456 =====

456    PART IV  •  THE EssEnTIALs  oF DEsIgn
Fields can include First Name, Last Name, Email Address, Regarding (a subject field that 
supplies a drop-down menu of the company’s product or service selections, asking the user to 
“Please make a selection”), an “Enter Your Message Here:” section (a free-form space where 
users can type in their message), and the standard Submit and Clear buttons at the bottom of the 
form. Using this type of form permits the analyst to have the user data already formatted correctly 
for storage in a database. Consequently, it makes the data entered into a feedback form easier to 
analyze in the aggregate.
Thus, an analyst does more than just design a response to individual email. The analyst helps 
the organization capture, store, process, and analyze valuable customer information in a manner 
that makes it more likely that the company will be capable of spotting important trends (perhaps 
using data analytics) in customer response rather than simply reacting to individual queries.
Easy Navigation for Ecommerce Websites
Ecommerce websites are commonly designed to have “intuitive navigation.” Users need to know 
how to navigate a site without having to learn a new interface and without having to explore every 
inch of the website before they can find what they want. The standard for this type of navigational 
approach is called one-click navigation.
Megasearch engines that obtain results from multiple search 
engines, aggregate the results, and display them in a more useful 
way than any single search engine can have been available for a 
long time. There is a unique application on the Mac platform that 
goes one step further.
That application is DEVONagent Pro, software that searches, 
then filters out broken links, outdated pages, and advertisements. 
To accomplish this, it downloads search results and analyses 
them before displaying them. Users have the option to view the 
results in a relevance-ranked list or see the results in a graphical 
topic map.
Analysts will find DEVONagent Pro useful if complex searches 
are required (that is, if standard searches do not dig deep enough 
to find the exact information needed). It is also useful for searches 
that need to be repeated often, and it can be automated to perform 
searches regularly.
MAC APPEAL
FIGURE 14. MAC
Powerful and complex searches are possible with DEVONagent Pro. (Screenshot from 
DEVONagent Pro. Copyright © by DEVONtechnologies. Reprinted by permission.)


===== BOOK PAGE 457 =====

CHAPTER 14  •  HUmAn–ComPUTER  InTERACTIon AnD  UX DEsIgn     457
You can add four enhancements to design easy, one-click navigation for an ecommerce site: 
(1) create a roll-over menu, (2) build a collection of hierarchical links so the home page becomes 
an outline of the key topic headings associated with the website, (3) place a site map on the home 
page and emphasize the link to it (place this on every page on the site), and (4) place a naviga-
tional bar on every inside page (usually at the top or on the left side of the page) that repeats the 
categories used on the entry screen.
Roll-Over Menus. A roll-over menu (or roll-over button) can be created with cascading style 
sheets with JavaScript and HTML divisions. The rollover menu appears when the customer using 
the website moves the cursor over a link.
Hierarchical Links. Creating an outline of the content of the site through the presentation of a 
table of contents on the home page is another way to speed navigation of the site. This design, 
however, imposes severe constraints on the designer’s creativity, and sometimes simply pre-
senting a list of topics does not adequately convey the strategic mission of the organization to 
the user.
Site Map. Designing and then prominently displaying the link to a site map is a third way to 
improve navigational efficiency. Remember to include the link to the site map on the home page 
and on every other page as well.
Navigation Bar.  You can design navigation bars  that are consistently displayed on the home 
page as well as at the top and on the left of all other pages that comprise the site. Once you have 
established (during the information requirements phase) the most useful and most used categories 
(usually categories such as “Our Company,” “Our Products,” “Buy Now,” “Contact Us,” “Site 
Map,” and “Search”), remember to include them on all pages.
Other Navigation Options. Including a search function is another option. Consider adding a search 
engine such as Google to your site. Simple search functions work well for small, manageable 
sites, but as a site grows large, advanced search functions that include Boolean logic (discussed 
later in this chapter) are needed.
Creating flexibility in the way users navigate the web is also important. An expert Web 
designer would incorporate many ways to look up information on a particular subject. Figure 14.10 
shows a web page from DinoTech. A user interested in an international IT career can find infor-
mation from the DinoTech website in three different ways. If the user is interested in working in 
Argentina, they can click on the Argentine flag, click on the name of the country, or click on the 
map representing Argentina.
FIGURE 14.10
A web page that allows users 
to navigate to the desired page 
in different ways. (Used with 
permission from Microsoft)


===== BOOK PAGE 458 =====

458    PART IV  •  THE EssEnTIALs  oF DEsIgn
Designing a website with navigation for users with different cognitive processing or interests 
is desirable. It is even possible that the same user may use all three of these methods at different 
times. They all add to the usability of a website.
The main priority in navigation, however, is to make it extremely easy for users to return 
to a previous page and make it somewhat easy to return to the place where they entered the 
site. The main concern is keeping customers on the website. The longer customers are on 
the site, the greater the chance that they will purchase something. If users navigate to a link in 
the website, make sure they can easily find their way back. Doing these things will ensure the  
stickiness of the website. Do not create any barriers to the customer who wants to return to 
the client’s website.
As detailed in Chapter 12 on designing effective input, recall that analysts can use standard 
navigational elements and icons such as a hamburger icon or menu, context-sensitive help, input 
validation, a breadcrumb trail, and fat footers to give their web designs a professional look that 
users can readily understand and navigate.
Mashups
An application programming interface (API) is a set of small programs and protocols used like 
building blocks for building software applications. When two or more APIs are used together, 
they form a mashup. Many mashups are open source, so developers can use an API from a site 
like Google Maps and combine it with an API that contains other data, resulting in a new website 
that creates an entirely new application.
A large corporation that has many retail outlets in a region may want to make it easier for 
customers to find their retail stores. They may want to hire a company like Blipstar, which provides 
a service that allows companies to upload information about retail stores. Blipstar geocodes them 
and places them on a Google map. The company then puts a link to this information on its own 
website, so customers can simply enter their zip or postal code and let the mashup display the 
location of the nearest retail store. Blipstar works on mobile devices.
Mashups are becoming a popular way to present information. Expect to see many useful 
mashup applications already in use. Look for them at www.programmableweb.com.
Cookie Compliance
Cookie compliance ensures that a website uses cookies only in ways permitted by law. Cookies, 
as you may recall, are text files that are stored on a visitor’s browser in order to observe and track 
the visitor. Basically, a developer needs to determine how the website uses cookies and then 
inform visitors about the intended cookies. The website can be set up to ask visitors to choose the 
types of cookies they want the website to track.
When this book was written, there were three regulations that governed cookie permissions in 
the United States, the United Kingdom, and Europe (other countries not represented in the three 
mentioned also have major privacy laws that must be observed): the General Data Protection 
Regulation (GPDR), the Privacy Directive (EU Cookie Law), and the California Consumer 
Privacy Act (CCPA).
In addition to informing visitors about the use of cookies and giving users a chance to opt out 
of nonessential cookies, the CCPA lets visitors know whether the owners of the business behind 
the website will share or sell information gathered through use of cookies with third parties.
Cookies can be characterized in different ways and these compliance directives would like 
the website to ask visitors to choose which cookies they accept. The categories are:
1. Strictly necessary cookies, for example, those cookies that keep the user logged into the 
site or remember the contents of the visitor’s shopping cart.
2. Preference or functional cookies, for example, those that remember the visitor’s preferred 
language for future browsing sessions.
3. Analytics cookies, which compile statistics cookies that can track how visitors use a 
website so that the owner can improve the website’s performance
4. Marketing cookies that allow advertisers to display targeted ads. This may include giving 
permission to supply information to third parties for advertising purposes.


===== BOOK PAGE 459 =====

CHAPTER 14  •  HUmAn–ComPUTER  InTERACTIon AnD  UX DEsIgn     459
Arguments can be made that cookies can improve the performance for all visitors, make it 
easier for a specific visitor to return to the website, and experience advertising that is relevant 
to the visitor rather than aimed at a general audience. Privacy advocates argue that cookies are 
intrusive, and visitors should have the right to accept or decline cookies. Figure 14.11 shows an 
example of offering the visitor options regarding cookies.
The following are general rules and practices that systems analysts should know that apply 
to cookie permissions.
1. Permission needs to be given before cookies are processed
2. Consent definitions need to be intelligible using plain English
3. Consent must be freely given
4. A record of the consent must be kept
5. A visitor has the right to reverse their consent decision
6. Content permission should be renewed every year, although some guidelines suggest every 
six months
We can expext cookie compliance and privacy features to evolve over the years. It is prudent 
to check on current regulations and standards.
Chatbots, Ecommerce, and AI
Pressure from users is pushing ecommerce developers to improve customer service on websites. 
One way to do this is through an AI chatbot. A chatbot is software that responds to human 
queries in conversational ways, answers questions posed, and also deals with specific requests for 
information. Customers want instant feedback as well as easy shopping experiences. M-commerce, 
FIGURE 14.11
Compliance preference forms. 
(Courtesy: Cookie though)


===== BOOK PAGE 460 =====

460    PART IV  •  THE EssEnTIALs  oF DEsIgn
or mobile ecommerce, has meant that the pace of interactions is accelerating, which translates into 
more pressure on ecommerce sites to handle many more customer queries on a myriad of devices 
all interacting at an increasingly rapid rate.
Chatbots are built on AI. Although they are relatively inexpensive to implement, the true 
cost comes in developing a highly efficient bot that is flexible but can make use of innovative 
technologies like voice recognition.
Adding a chatbot that is not customized properly results in a degradation of customer service, 
so it could create a boomerang effect, having the opposite effect of good customer service. So, the 
analyst will want to make sure that the chatbot is integral and aligned with UX design. A chatbot 
must be able to respond to queries correctly. Importantly, the chatbot should also be integrated 
into any existing server-side data access layers that would include customer information, products, 
orders, and other transient data for the back-end of the ecommerce site.
The most well-designed ecommerce sites always retain the customer option of talking with 
a human representative. The chatbot must be able to sense, either through customer word choice, 
vocal inflection, or selection of an option button, that in order to continue addressing a problem, 
a human is required. Chatbots will not replace humans for the foreseeable future.
DESIGNING QUERIES
When users ask questions of, or communicate with, a database, they are said to query it. Six dif-
ferent types of queries are among the most common. Your careful attention to query design can 
help reduce users’ time spent in querying the database, help them find the data they want, and 
result in a smoother user experience overall.
Query Types
The questions we pose concerning data from our database are referred to as queries. There are six 
basic query types. Each query involves three items: an entity, an attribute, and a value. In each 
case, two of these are given, and the intent of the query is to find the remaining item.
Figure 14.12 illustrates all six query types.
Query Type 1. The entity and one of the entity’s attributes are given. The purpose of the query is 
to find the value. The query can be expressed as follows:
What is the value of a specified attribute for a particular entity?
FIGURE 14.12
It is possible to perform six  
basic types of queries on a table 
that contains entities, attributes, 
and values.
EMPLOYEE NAME DEPARTMENT S/H YEAR-2019 YEAR-2020 YEAR-2021 YEAR-2022EMPLOYEE
NUMBER
EARNINGS-HISTORY
72845 Ruwa Outside Sales S 48,960 51,400 49,050 52,900
72888 Dryne Outside Sales S 42,200 44,700 48,020 50,580
73712 Fawcett Distribution H 43,500 45,500 46,780 47,100
80345 Well, Jr. Marketing S 65,000 71,000 75,000 78,000
84672 Piper Maintenance H 40,560 42,340 43,520 44,910
89760 Acquia Accounting H 38,755 40,040 41,380 42,540
The salaries
are the values.
The employee
numbers are
the entities.
The years
are the
attributes.


===== BOOK PAGE 461 =====

CHAPTER 14  •  HUmAn–ComPUTER  InTERACTIon AnD  UX DEsIgn     461
Sometimes it is more convenient to use notation to formulate the query. This query can be writ-
ten as
()←V EA,
where V stands for the value, E for entity, and A for attribute, and the variables in parentheses 
are given.
The question
What did employee number 73712 make in year 2022?
can be stated more specifically as
What is the value of the attribute YEAR-2022 for the entity EMPLOYEE NUMBER 
73712?
The record containing employee number 73712 will be found, and the answer to the query will 
be $47,100.
Query Type 2. The intent of the second query type is to find an entity or entities when an attribute 
and value are given. Query type 2 can be stated as follows:
What entity has a specified value for a particular attribute?
Because values can also be numeric, it is possible to search for a value equal to, greater than, 
less than, not equal to, greater than or equal to, and so on. An example of this type of query is as 
follows:
What employee(s) earned more than $50,000 in 2022?
The notation for query type 2 is
()←E VA,
In this case, three employees made more than $50,000, so the response will be a list of the 
employee numbers for the three employees: 72845, 72888, and 80345.
Query Type 3. The purpose of this query type is to determine which attributes fit the description 
provided when the entity and value are given. Query type 3 can be stated as follows:
What attribute(s) has a specified value for a particular entity?
This query is useful when many similar attributes have the same property. The following example 
has similar attributes (specific years) that contain the annual salaries for the employees of the 
company:
What years did employee number 72845 make over $50,000?
or, more precisely,
What attributes {YEAR-2019, YEAR-2020, YEAR-2021, YEAR-2022} have a value > 
50,000 for the entity EMPLOYEE-NUMBER 72845?
where the optional list in braces ({ }) is the set of eligible attributes.
The notation for query type 3 is
()← VEA,
In this example, Ruwa (employee number 72845) made over $50,000 for two years. Therefore, 
the response will be year 2020 and year 2022. Query type 3 is rarer than the preceding two types 
due to the requirement of having similar attributes exhibiting the same properties.
Query Type 4. Query type 4 is similar to query type 1. The difference is that the values of all 
attributes are desired. Query 4 can be expressed as follows:
List all the values for all the attributes for a particular entity.


===== BOOK PAGE 462 =====

462    PART IV  •  THE EssEnTIALs  oF DEsIgn
An example of query type 4 is:
List all the details in the earnings history file for employee number 72888.
The notation for query type 4 is
()←VE Aall ,a ll
The response for this query will be the entire record for the employee named Dryne (employee 
number 72888).
Query Type 5. The fifth type of query is another global query, but it is similar in form to query 
type 2. Query type 5 can be stated as follows:
List all entities that have a specified value for all attributes.
An example of query type 5 is:
List all the employees whose earnings exceeded $50,000 in any of the years available.
The notation for query type 5 is
()←EV Aall ,a ll
The response to this query will be 72845, 72888, and 80345.
Query Type 6. The sixth query type is similar to query type 3. The difference is that query type 6 
requests a listing of the attributes for all entities rather than a particular entity. Query type 6 can 
be stated as follows:
List all the attributes that have a specified value for all entities.
The following is an example of query type 6:
List all the years for which earnings exceeded $40,000 for all employees in the company.
The notation for query type 6 is
()←AV Eall ,a ll
The response will be YEAR-2020, YEAR-2021, and YEAR-2022. As with query type 3, query 
type 6 is not used as much as other types.
Building More Complex Queries. The preceding six query types are building blocks for more 
complex queries. Expressions, referred to as Boolean operators, can be formed for queries. An 
example of a Boolean operator is:
List all the customers who have zip codes greater than or equal to 60001 and less than 
70000, and who have ordered more than $500 from our catalogs or have ordered at least 
five times in the past year.
One difficulty with this statement is determining which operator (for example, AND) belongs 
with which condition; it is also difficult to determine the sequence in which the parts of the expres-
sion should be carried out. The following may help to clarify this problem:
LIST ALL CUSTOMERS HA VING (ZIP-CODE GE 60001 AND ZIP-CODE LT 70000) 
AND (AMOUNT-ORDERED GT 500 OR TIMES-ORDERED GE 5)
Now some of the confusion is eliminated. The first improvement is that the operators 
are expressed more clearly as GE, GT, and LT than as English phrases, such as “at least.” 
Second, the attributes are given distinct names, such as AMOUNT-ORDERED and TIMES-
ORDERED. In the earlier sentence, these attributes were both referred to as “have ordered.” 
Finally, parentheses are used to indicate the order in which the logic is to be performed. Whatever 
is in parentheses is done first.
Operations are generally performed in a predetermined order of precedence. Arithmetic 
operations are usually performed first (exponentiation, then either multiplication or division,


===== BOOK PAGE 463 =====

CHAPTER 14  •  HUmAn–ComPUTER  InTERACTIon AnD  UX DEsIgn     463
and then addition or subtraction). Next, comparative operations are performed. These operations 
are GT (greater than), LT (less than), and others. Finally, the Boolean operations are performed 
(first AND and then OR). Within the same level, the order generally goes from left to right. The 
precedence is summarized in Figure 14.13.
Query Methods
Two popular query languages are query by example and structured query language.
Query by Example. Query by example (QBE) is a simple but powerful method for implementing 
queries in database systems, such as Microsoft Access. The database fields are selected and 
displayed in a grid, and the requested query values are entered either in the field area or below 
the field. The query should be able to select both rows from the table that match conditions as well 
as specific columns (fields). Complex conditions may be set to select records, and the user may 
easily specify the columns to be sorted. Figure 14.14 is an example of a query using Microsoft 
Access. The query design screen is divided into two portions. The top portion contains the tables 
selected for the query and their relationships, and the bottom portion contains the query selection 
grid. Fields from the database tables are dragged to the grid.
The first two rows contain the field and the table in which the field is located. The next row 
contains sorting information. In this example, the results will be sorted by CUSTOMER NAME. 
A checkmark in the Show box (fourth row down) indicates that the field is to be displayed in 
the results. Notice that the CUSTOMER NUMBER, CUSTOMER NAME, and STATUS CODE 
MEANING are selected for the resulting display (other fields are displayed as well, but they do not 
FIGURE 14.13
Arithmetic, comparative, and 
Boolean operators are processed in 
a hierarchical order of precedence 
unless parentheses are used.
Type 
Arithmetic Operators 1 * *
 2 *  /
 3 +  –
Comparative Operators 4 GT  LT
 EQ  NE
  GE  LE
Boolean Operators 5 AND
 6 OR
Level                Symbol
FIGURE 14.14
Query by example using  
Microsoft Access. (Used with 
permission from Microsoft)


===== BOOK PAGE 464 =====

464    PART IV  •  THE EssEnTIALs  oF DEsIgn
costumes or even when to buy more costumes of a particular type. 
She also needs to remember to keep in the good graces of customers 
she has previously turned down for a particular costume rental, to 
know when to recall an overdue costume, and so on.
Formulate several queries that will help her get the information 
she needs from the database. (Hint: Make any assumptions neces-
sary about the types of information she needs to make decisions and 
use as many of the different query types discussed in this chapter as 
you can.) In a paragraph, describe how Annie’s queries would be dif-
ferent if she were working with a web-based or hyperlinked system.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 14.6 
Hey, Look Me Over (Reprise)
Y ou have been called back to take another look at Merman’s 
Costume Rentals. Here is part of the database created for Annie 
Oaklea of Merman’s (with whom you last worked in Consulting 
Opportunities 7.1 and 8.1). The database contains information, 
such as the cost of the rental; the date checked out, the date due 
back, and the number of days the costume has been rented since 
the beginning of the year (YTD DAYS OUT) (see Figure 14.C1).
Analyzing Annie’s typical day in the costume rental business, 
you realize there are several requests she must make of the database 
so that she can make decisions on when to replace frequently used 
FIGURE 14. C1
A portion of the database from Merman’s Costume Rental shop.
REQUESTS
TURNED
DOWN
TYPE OF
COSTUME
YTD
DAYS
OUT
DUE
DATE
COST
OF
COSTUME
NUMBER
SUIT
NUMBER
COSTUME-RENTAL
0003 Lady MacBeth F, SM 01 Blue 15.00 10/15 11/30 150 Standard 2
1342 Bear F, MED 01 Dk. Brown 12.50 10/24 11/09 26 Standard 0
1344 Bear F, MED 02 Dk. Brown 12.50 10/24 11/09 115 Standard 0
1347 Bear F, LG 01 Black 12.50 10/24 11/09 22 Standard 0
1348 Bear F, LG 02 Black 12.50 11/01 11/08 10 Standard 0
1400 Goldilocks F, MED 01 Light Blue 7.00 10/24 11/09 140 Standard 0
1402 Goldilocks F, MED 02 Light Blue 7.00 10/28 11/09 10 Standard 0
1852 Hamlet M, MED 01 Dark Green 15.00 11/02 11/23 115 Standard 3
1853 Ophelia F, SM 01 Light Blue 15.00 11/02 11/23 22 Standard 0
4715 Prince M, LG 01 White/purple 10.00 11/04 11/21 145 Standard 5
4730 Frog M, SM 01 Green 7.00 11/04 11/21 175 Standard 2
7822 Jester M, MED 01 Multi 7.50 11/10 12/08 12 Standard 0
7824 Jester M, MED 02 Multi 7.50 11/09 11/15 10 Standard 0
7823 Spiderman M, LG 01 Multi 7.00 11/19 12/05 21 Standard 0
8645 Mr. Spock N, LG 01 Orange 18.00 09/07 09/12 150 Trendy 4
9000 Pantomime F, LG 01 Red 7.00 08/25 09/15 56 Standard 0
9001 Pantomime M, MED 01 Blue 7.00 08/25 09/15 72 Standard 0
9121 Juggler M, MED 01 Multi 7.00 11/05 11/19 14 Standard
Standard
0
9156 Napoleon M, SM 01 Blue/white 15.00 10/26 11/23 56 1
COLOR
DATE
CHECKED
OUTDESCRIPTION
show in the display). Notice that the ACCOUNT STATUS CODE and ACCOUNT TYPE CODE 
are not checked and therefore will not be in the final results. In the criteria rows, there is a 1 in 
the ACCOUNT STATUS CODE (indicating an active record) and a C and D (selecting a General 
Customer or a Discount Customer) in the ACCOUNT TYPE CODE columns. Two conditions in 
the same row indicate an AND condition, and two conditions in different rows represent an OR 
condition. This query specifies that the user should select both an Active Customer and either a 
General or Discount Customer.


===== BOOK PAGE 465 =====

CHAPTER 14  •  HUmAn–ComPUTER  InTERACTIon AnD  UX DEsIgn     465
The results of a query are displayed in a table, illustrated in Figure 14. 15. Notice that the 
ACCOUNT STATUS CODE and ACCOUNT TYPE CODE do not display. They are not checked 
and are included in the query for selection purposes only. Instead, the code meanings are dis-
played, which are more useful to the user. The customer names are sequenced alphabetically.
Structured Query Language. Structured query language (SQL) is another popular language 
for implementing queries. It uses a series of words and commands to select the rows and columns 
that should be displayed in the resulting table. Figure 14.16 contains SQL code. The SELECT 
DISTINCT ROW keyword determines which rows are to be selected. The Where keyword speci-
fies the condition that the CUSTOMER NAME should be used to select the data entered in the 
LIKE parameter.
FIGURE 14.15
A query by example for 
CUSTOMER STATUS yields 
these results. (Used with 
permission from Microsoft)
FIGURE 14.16
SQL for the CUSTOMER NAME 
parameter query.
SELECT DISTINCTROW  
Customer.[Customer Number],
Customer.[Customer Name],
Customer.City,
Customer.Telephone    
FROM Customer
WHERE  (((Customer.[Customer Name])
Like ([Enter a partial Customer Name] & “*”)));     
Summary
In this chapter, we examined human–computer interaction (HCI), a variety of interfaces, and designing the 
user interface. We also introduced user experience (UX) design, developing multitouch gestures to interface 
with smartphones and tablets, designing user feedback, and designing ecommerce website feedback and 
navigation. We focused on understanding HCI to ensure the functionality and usability of computer systems 
we design. When analysts create a proper fit among the HCI elements of the human, the computer, and the 
task, it leads to improved performance and overall psychological and physical well-being of the individual. 
Designs focus on developing a proper fit.


===== BOOK PAGE 466 =====

466    PART IV  •  THE EssEnTIALs  oF DEsIgn
Usability identifies what works for users and what does not. Physical considerations of HCI design 
include vision, hearing, and touch. Physical capabilities and limitations should be taken into consideration 
during task and interface design. A variety of user interfaces and input devices are possible. Some interfaces 
are particularly well suited to inexperienced users, whereas others are better suited to experienced users. 
Combine interfaces such as drop-down menus and graphical interfaces for increased effectiveness.
UX design was discussed as a customer-first method for designing software. UX is an abbreviation for 
“user experience.” It is a process that observes the behavior of customers and strives to enhance customer 
satisfaction and loyalty. It accomplishes this by improving usability and ease of use, but it also recognizes 
that users must enjoy interacting with a software product or system. UX is also a design culture, which 
chooses to give the user a good experience over maximizing short-term profit. The seven benefits of using 
UX design for ecommerce transactions include (1) tasks can be completed more quickly by the customer, 
(2) more tasks can be completed in a given amount of customer time, (3) task results can be more accurate, 
(4) less support is needed to address user complaints arising out of poor user experience, (5) users will com-
plete the transaction rather than abandoning their cart and leaving the site, (6) customers will remain loyal 
and not seek other websites or software, and (7) the user will be more satisfied with the overall experience.
This chapter also provided some experience in applying HCI to help in your design of human–computer 
interfaces for computers, smartphones, and tablets; feedback; ecommerce websites; and web queries. The 
web has posed new challenges for designers because the user is not known.
Creative opportunities for developers to design multitouch gestures for interfacing with touch-sensitive 
(capacitive-sensing) smartphones and tablets are increasing. Some conventions should be observed, users 
should be able to learn the interface quickly, and gestures should make sense to users. Developers can include 
alerts, notices, and queries for smartphones and tablets but should always offer an opt-out option to them. 
Using badges is an unobtrusive way to provide additional information to users, but badges should be used 
with caution so that they don’t rely on user interaction to display accurate information. Developers can also 
alter designs to accommodate intelligent personal assistants.
Virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR) are offering new opportunities for users to experi-
ence training and other situations. The future of VR and AR may be in integrating user experiences for the 
Metaverse. Although years away, the realization of the Metaverse translates into high demand for software 
developers for an extended period.
Good dialog design can help users interact more efficiently with apps and web-based screens. Users’ 
need for feedback from a system is an important consideration. Feedback is most often visual, with text, 
graphics, or icons the most common. Audio feedback can also be effective.
Improve functionality of websites by eliciting customer feedback through automatic email feedback 
buttons or by including blank feedback forms on the website. Four important navigation design strategies 
improve the stickiness of ecommerce websites: (1) rollover menus, (2) hierarchical displays of links on the 
entry screen, (3) site maps, and (4) navigation bars that provide one-click navigation.
Designing for privacy protections through cookie compliance is increasingly important in ecommerce 
design. Analysts need to observe all of the standards imposed by the countries in which ecommerce will be 
taking place.
Ecommerce website designs can effectively add a chatbot, which is software that responds to human que-
ries in conversational ways, answers questions posed, and also deals with specific requests for information.
Queries are designed to allow users to extract meaningful data from a database. There are six basic 
types of queries, and they can be combined using Boolean logic to form more complex queries. QBE and 
SQL are two common languages for querying database systems.
Keywords and Phrases
accelerometer
alerts
application programming interface (API)
augmented reality (AR)
badges
Boolean operators
California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA)
capacitive sensing
chatbot
cookie compliance
feedback
fit
form-fill interfaces
General Data Protection Regulation (GPDR)
gestures
human–computer interaction (HCI)
intelligent personal assistants
intuitive navigation
mashup
menu
Metaverse
multitouch gestures
natural-language interface
navigation bar
nested menus
notices


===== BOOK PAGE 467 =====

CHAPTER 14  •  HUmAn–ComPUTER  InTERACTIon AnD  UX DEsIgn     467
Review Questions
1. Define HCI.
2. Explain how fit among the HCI elements of the human, the computer, and the tasks to be performed 
leads to performance and well-being.
3. What are the components of the term performance in the HCI context?
4. What is meant by the word well-being when used in an HCI context?
5. List 5 of the 11 heuristics for judging the usability of computer systems and ecommerce websites 
provided by Nielsen and others.
6. List three physical considerations that HCI design addresses.
7. List three ways analysts can improve task or interface design to help a person who is visually 
impaired, hard of hearing, or has limited mobility, respectively.
8. What are the five objectives for designing user interfaces?
9. Define natural-language interface. What is the major drawback of these interfaces?
10. Explain what is meant by question-and-answer interfaces. To what kind of users are they best suited?
11. Describe how users use onscreen menus.
12. What is a nested menu? What are its advantages?
13. Define onscreen input/output form. What is the chief advantage of these forms?
14. What are the advantages of web-based fill-in forms?
15. What are the drawbacks of web-based form-fill interfaces?
16. Define graphical user interface.
17. For what type of user is a GUI particularly effective?
18. What is a synonym for the term “capacitive sensing”?
19. List three gestures that can be used to interface with touch-sensitive smartphones and tablets.
20. Describe a problem that can occur if a designer uses nonstandard gestures to create an interface for 
smartphones or tablets.
21. Why is the metaphor important in designing a user interface for an app?
22. What do alerts do in a smartphone or tablet interface?
23. What do badges do in a smartphone or tablet interface?
24. Why is it important to include an opt-out option on all notices and alerts for smartphone and tablet 
users?
25. Why is it a good idea to avoid the use of a badge on apps?
26. List four familiar intelligent personal assistants.
27. What is another name for an intelligent personal assistant?
28. What are the differences between designing for AR and designing for VR?
29. What is the Metaverse?
30. Designs for the iPhone can take advantage of using natural-language voice recognition, called Siri. Is 
Siri an intelligent personal assistant? Why or why not?
31. What are the three guidelines for designing good screen dialog?
32. What are the roles of icons, graphics, and colors in providing feedback?
33. List eight ways to achieve the goal of minimal operator action when designing a user interface.
34. List five standards that can aid in evaluating user interfaces.
35. Define what is meant by UX design.
36. In a sentence, compare and contrast the differences between taking a traditional approach to design 
versus adopting a UX design approach.
37. List five dos for practicing good UX design. List five don’ts for practicing good UX design.
38. What are the seven benefits of using UX design for ecommerce transactions?
one-click navigation
performance
physical considerations of HCI
Privacy Directive (EU Cookie Law)
pull-down menu
query
query by example (QBE)
question-and-answer interface
rollover menu
site map
smartphone
stickiness
structured query language (SQL)
stylus
tablet
task
touch-sensitive screen
usability
UX design (user experience design)
virtual assistants
virtual reality (VR)
web-based form-fill interface
voice recognition


===== BOOK PAGE 468 =====

468    PART IV  •  THE EssEnTIALs  oF DEsIgn
39. What are the seven situations that require feedback for users?
40. What is a suitable way of telling a user that input was accepted?
41. When a user is informed that their input is not in the correct form, what additional feedback should 
be given at the same time?
42. List four ways to notify a web user that input is not in the correct form.
43. Why is it unacceptable to notify the user that input is not correct solely through the use of audible 
beeping or buzzing?
44. When a request is not completed, what feedback should be provided to the user?
45. Describe two types of website designs for eliciting feedback from customers.
46. List four practical ways an analyst can improve the ease of user navigation and the stickiness of an 
ecommerce website.
47. List five navigational options that use standard icons or elements that the designer can add to an 
ecommerce website to improve navigation and understanding.
48. What are hypertext links? Where should they be used?
49. Describe what a mashup is.
50. Which of the three cookie permsssion standards will let visitors know whether the owners of the 
business behind the website will share or sell information gathered through use of cookies with third 
parties?
51. What is a chatbot?
52. List in shorthand notation the six basic query types.
Problems
1. Manu Narayan owns several first-class hotels worldwide, including properties in Manhattan, 
Mumbai, and even some in the Philadelphia suburbs. He wants to make sure that the HCI is 
appropriate to each culture but also wants to be able to share the software among all of his hotel 
reservation departments. Design a nested menus interface for a check-in and check-out hotel 
reservation system that can be used internationally. Use numbers to select a menu item. Show  
how each menu would look on a computer display for a desktop system.
2. Kristin Angelle needs displays that will show the musical instrument inventory in her chain of music 
stores that caters to musicians playing in world-class symphony orchestras in Basel, Switzerland; 
Buenos Aires, Argentina; and Philadelphia and New York in the United States. Design a form-fill 
interface for the inventory control of musical instruments in all four stores that could be used on a 
computer display screen. Assume that English will be the interface language.
3. Design a web-based form-fill interface to accomplish the same task as in Problem 2.
a. What difficulties did you encounter? Discuss them in a paragraph.
b. Of the two designs you did, which would you say is better suited to Kristin’s task? Why? List 
three reasons for your choice. How would you test their usability?
4. A UK-based travel agent, Philip Menard, LLC, would like your systems team to design a smartphone 
and tablet app he can give away free to his clients for booking seats for airlines with which his firm 
has solid business ties, such as British Air, RyanAir, and Virgin Atlantic.
a. Show what the interface would look like on a smartphone display.
b. Make a list of gestures to include for users to activate the display to book an airline seat and write 
down what each gesture does.
5. An IT executive, Laura Kai Chen, from Jersey IT Innovators, Inc., has asked that you design a 
graphical user interface for an executive desktop to help her in her work. Use icons for file cabinets, a 
wastebasket, a telephone, and so on. Show how they would appear on the computer display.
6. Josh and Colleen, a celebrity chef couple and restaurant owners from Cherry Hill, New Jersey, want 
to be able to receive clear feedback on the systems used to manage food inventory at their four 
“farm to table” restaurants in Cherry Hill, New Jersey; Philadelphia, and Horsham, Pennsylvania; 
and New York City. Design a display that provides appropriate feedback for a user whose daily 
update reports on locally available produce has been successfully sent to the chefs.
7. Design a screen for a payroll software package that displays information telling Josh and Colleen 
(Problem 6) how to get more detailed feedback when viewing weekly and monthly payroll figures.
8. Design a web-based display that shows an acceptable way to tell Josh and Colleen (Problem 6) that 
input to their system was accepted.
9. Using UX design, design three pages of an ecommerce website where Josh and Colleen’s devoted 
restaurant customers (also known as foodies) (Problem 6) can purchase their cookbook, reserve spots 
in cooking and butchering breakdown classes with Josh, and purchase freshly prepared desserts that 
can be shipped to residential customers in the Northeast United States with one-day shipping.


===== BOOK PAGE 469 =====

CHAPTER 14  •  HUmAn–ComPUTER  InTERACTIon AnD  UX DEsIgn     469
10. Write six different queries for the file in Problem 1 in Chapter 13.
11. Write six different queries for the 3NF relation in Problem 3 in Chapter 13.
12. Design a search that will find potential competitors of a company such as World’s Trend on the web. 
Assume that you are the customer. World’s Trend began as a mail-order supplier of high-quality, 
fashionable clothing for men, women, and children. Customers place orders by phone or email, by 
mailing an order form included with each catalog, or by placing orders online via the ecommerce 
store on World’s Trend’s website.
13. Search for World’s Trend’s potential competitors on the web. (You won’t find World’s Trend itself on 
the web. It is a fictional company.) See Problem 12 for a brief description of World’s Trend. Make a 
list of those you’ve found.
Group Projects
1. With your group members, create a pull-down menu for an employment agency that matches profes-
sional candidates to position openings. Include a list of keystrokes that would directly invoke the 
menu options using the Alt-X format. The menu has the following options:
Add employee
Change employee
Delete employee
Employee inquiry
Position inquiry
Employer inquiry
Add employer
Change employer
Delete employer
Match employee to opening
Print open positions report
Print successful matches report
Add position
Change position to upgrade required skills
Delete position
2. In a paragraph, describe the problems your group faced in creating the menu in Group Problem 1.
3. The drag-and-drop feature is used in GUIs and allows the user to move sentences around in a word 
processing package. As a group, suggest how drag and drop can be used to its fullest potential in 
the following applications: (Hint: If you are unsure about the meaning of any of the applications, 
research them briefly on the web before devising an answer.)
a. Project management software (Chapter 3)
b. Relational database program (Chapter 13)
c. Display or forms designer (Chapter 12)
d. Spreadsheet program
e. Computer-assisted software engineering tool for drawing data flow diagrams (Chapter 7)
f. Smartphone calendar (Chapter 3)
g. Illustration in a drawing package
h. CASE tool for developing data dictionaries (Chapter 8)
i. Decision tree drawing program (Chapter 9)
j. Website for collecting consumer opinions on new products (Chapter 11)
k. Organizing bookmarks for websites
For each solution your group designs, draw the display and show movement by using an arrow.
4. Ask each of the members of your group to request a search based on their leisure activities (such as 
running, travel, meditation, streaming movies). If there are four people in your group, there will be 
four unique searches to perform. Now go ahead and do all the searches. Compare your results. Does 
the person who is involved with the activity have an advantage over the people who know less about 
it? Explain.
5. Look at the following mashup websites and describe how each of them adds value by providing a 
service.
a. Modern Business Guide, www.thisweknow.org
b. Global Incident Map, www.globalincidentmap.com
c. Streeteasy, www.streeteasy.com


===== BOOK PAGE 470 =====

470    PART IV  •  THE EssEnTIALs  oF DEsIgn
Selected Bibliography
Adam, A., & Kreps, D. (2006). Web accessibility: A digital divide for disabled people? In E. Trauth, D. 
Howcraft, T. Butler, B. Fitzgerald, & J. DeGross (Eds.), Vol. 208. Societal and organizational impli-
cations for information systems (217–228). IFIP International Federation for Information Processing.
Baines, J., & Howard, C. (2016). UX lifecycle: The business guide to implementing great software user 
experiences (Kindle ed.). CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform.
Ball, M. (2021, June 29). Framework for the Metaverse. https://www.matthewball.vc/all/
forwardtothemetaverseprimer
Barki, H., & Hartwick, J. (1994). Measuring user participation, user involvement, and user attitude.  
MIS Quarterly, 18(1), 59–82.
Benyon, D. (2019). Designing user experience (4th ed.). Pearson.
Berstel, J., Reghizzi, S. C., Roussel, G., & San Pietro, P. (2005). A scalable formal method for design and 
automatic checking of user interfaces. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, 
14(2), 124–167.
Boag, P. (2017). User experience revolution. Smashing Media AG.
Carey, J., Galletta, D., Kim, J., Te’eni, D., Wildemuth, B., & Zhang, P. (2004). The role of 
human–computer interaction in management information systems curricula: A call to action. 
Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 13, 357–379.
Combs, V . (2021). Metaverse cheat sheet: Everything you need to know. https://lg-static.techrepublic 
.com/direct/whitepapers/Metaverse_Cheat_Sheet__1_.pdf
Davis, G. B., & Olson, M. H. (1985). Management information systems: Conceptual foundations, 
structure, and development. McGraw-Hill.
Falbe, T., Andersen, K., & Frederiksen, M. M. (2017). White Hat UX: The next generation in user 
experience. Amazon Kindle.
Galleta, D., & Zhang, P. (Eds.). (2006). Human–computer interaction and management information 
systems: Applications. M. E. Sharpe.
Greene, K. (2009, March). A better, cheaper multitouch interface. Technology Review. www.technology 
review.com/computing/22358/?a=f
Hartson, R., & Pyla, P. (2019). The UX book: Agile UX design for a quality user experience (2nd ed.). 
Morgan Kaufmann.
Heckstall, V . (2017, March 6). 10 tools to create your own chatbot for free without coding. http://www.
business2community.com/business-innovation
Hornbaek, K., & Frokjaer, E. (2005, April). Comparing usability problems and redesign proposals as input 
to practical systems development. CHI 2005, pp. 391–400.
Mantei, M. M., & Teorey, T. J. (1989). Incorporating behavioral techniques in the system development 
lifecycle. MIS Quarterly, 13(3), 257–267.
Nielsen, J., & Mack, R. L. (1994). Usability inspection methods. Wiley.
Nielsen, J., Molich, R., Snyder, C., & Farrell, S. (2001). E-commerce user experience. Norman Nielsen 
Group.
Rubin, J. (1994). Handbook of usability testing. Wiley.
Schneiderman, B., & Plaisant, C. (2005). Designing the user interface: Strategies for effective human–
computer interaction. Addison-Wesley.
Te’eni, D., Carey, J., & Zhang, P. (2007). Human–computer interaction: Developing effective organiza-
tional systems. Wiley.
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. (2017). Employers. http://www.eeoc.gov/employers/
index.cfm
Zhang, P., Carey, J., Te’eni, D., & Tremaine, M. (2005). Integrating human–computer interaction 
development into the systems development life cycle: A methodology. Communications of the 
Association for Information Systems, 15, 512–543.


===== BOOK PAGE 471 =====

Farley Katz/The New Yorker Collection/The Cartoon Bank
Quality Assurance  
and Implementation
PART  
V


===== BOOK PAGE 472 =====

472
Designing Accurate Data 
Entry Procedures
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Once you have mastered the material in this chapter, you will be able to:
1 Understand the uses of effective coding to support users in accomplishing their tasks.
2 Learn how to design effective and efficient data-capture approaches for people and 
systems.
3 Recognize how to ensure data quality through validation.
4 Articulate the data accuracy advantages of user input on ecommerce websites.
Making sure users are able to enter data into a system accurately is of utmost importance. 
It is by now axiomatic that the quality of data input determines the quality of information 
output. A systems analyst can support accurate data entry through the achievement of four 
broad objectives: (1) creating meaningful coding for data, (2) designing efficient data-capture 
approaches, (3) ensuring complete and effective data capture, and (4) ensuring data quality 
through validation.
The quality of data is a measurement of how consistently correct the data are within 
certain preset limits. Effectively coded data facilitate accurate human data entry by cutting 
down on the sheer quantity of data and thus the time required to enter the information.
When users enter data efficiently, data entry meets predetermined performance 
measures that give the relationship between the time spent on entry and the number 
of data items entered. Effective coding, effective and efficient data capture and entry, 
and assurance of data quality through validation procedures are all data-entry objectives 
covered in this chapter.
15 
CHAPTER

