
===== BOOK PAGE 473 =====

CHAPTER 15  •  DEsIgnIng A CCuRATE  D ATA  EnTR y PR oCEDuREs     473
EFFECTIVE CODING
Data can be entered more accurately and efficiently through the knowledgeable use of various 
codes. The process of putting ambiguous or cumbersome data into short, easily entered digits or 
letters is called coding (not to be confused with program coding).
Coding aids a systems analyst in reaching the objective of efficiency because data that are 
coded require less time for people to enter and thus reduce the number of items entered. Coding 
can also help in the appropriate sorting of data at a later point in the data transformation process. In 
addition, coded data saves valuable memory and storage space. Coding is a way of being eloquent 
but succinct in capturing data. In addition to providing accuracy and efficiency, codes should have 
a purpose that supports users. Specific types of codes allow us to treat data in a particular manner. 
Human purposes for coding include the following:
1. Keeping track of something
2. Classifying information
3. Concealing information
4. Revealing information
5. Requesting appropriate action
Each of these purposes for coding is discussed in the following sections, along with some examples 
of codes.
Keeping Track of Something
Sometimes we want merely to identify a person, place, or thing just to keep track of it. For 
example, a shop that manufactures custom-made upholstered furniture needs to assign a job 
number to a project. The salesperson needs to know the name and address of the customer, but the 
job shop manager or the workers who assemble the furniture need not know who the customer is.  
Consequently, an arbitrary number is assigned to the job. The number can be either random or 
sequential, as described in the following subsection.
questions whether it is possible to create an unbreakable code. 
While many people who study codes find this topic to be intriguing, 
there are many different purposes for creating codes. After you view 
the video, please reflect on the following questions:
1. Some businesses use codes to keep track of things. Why is 
this useful?
2. Codes can be used to sort things, in other words, put items 
into categories or classes. What is another example of clas-
sifying something? Why would this be useful?
3. Choose a business and explore why they may want to use 
coding to conceal some information.
4. Choose a different business than in Question 3 above and 
clarify why it is beneficial to have codes that reveal informa-
tion about a product or service.
5. Restaurants in the United States commonly use the code 86 
to indicate that the kitchen has run out of a particular item. 
The server then could advise the diner accordingly. What is 
another example of a code (it could be numeric, alphabetic, 
or alphanumeric) used to specify an action?
SYSTEMS SCENARIO  
Applying Cryptography and Coding
This chapter begins with effective coding to keep track of some-
thing, classify information, conceal information, reveal information, 
and request appropriate action. The video for this chapter is about 
cryptography, the science of making and breaking codes. The pur -
pose of cryptography, of course, is to conceal information. The 
video discusses how easy or difficult it is to break these codes and 
To view the video for this scenario,  
see eText Chapter 15.
SciShow/Boclips


===== BOOK PAGE 474 =====

474    PART V  •  Qu ALITy  A ssuRAnCE AnD IMPLEMEnTATIon
Simple Sequence Codes. The simple sequence code is a number that is assigned to something 
if it needs to be numbered. It has no relation to the data themselves. Figure 15.1 shows how a 
furniture manufacturer’s orders are assigned an order number. With this easy reference number, 
the company can keep track of the order in process. It is more efficient to enter job “5676” than 
“that brown and black rocking chair with bamboo for Feng Xu.”
Using a sequence code rather than a random number has some advantages. First, it eliminates 
the possibility of assigning the same number multiple times. Second, it gives users an approxima-
tion of when the order was received.
Sequence codes should be used when the order of processing requires knowledge of the 
sequence in which items enter the system or the order in which events unfold. For example, con-
sider a bank running a special promotion that makes it important to know when a person applied 
for a special, low-interest home loan because (all other things being equal) the special mortgage 
loans will be granted on a first-come, first-served basis. In this case, assigning a correct sequence 
code to each applicant is important.
Alphabetic Derivation Codes. At times it is undesirable to use sequence codes. The most obvious 
instance is when you do not wish to have someone read the code to figure out how many numbers 
have been assigned. Another situation in which sequence codes may not be useful is when a more 
complex code is desirable to avoid a costly mistake. One possible error would be to add a payment 
to account 223 when you meant to add it to account 224 because you entered an incorrect digit.
The alphabetic derivation code is a commonly used approach in identifying an account 
number. The example in Figure 15.2 comes from a mailing label for a U.S. magazine. The code 
becomes the account number. The first five digits come from the first five digits of the subscriber’s 
zip code, the next three are the first three consonants in the subscriber’s name, the next four 
numbers are from the street address, and the last three make up the code for the magazine. The 
main purpose of this code is to identify an account.
A secondary purpose is to print mailing labels. When designing this code, the zip code is 
the first part of the account number. The subscriber records are usually updated only once a year, 
but the primary purpose of the records is to print mailing labels once a month or once per week. 
Having the zip code as the first part of a primary key field means that the records do not have to 
be sorted by zip code for bulk mailing because records on a file are stored in primary key sequence. 
Notice that the expiration date is not part of the account number because that number can change 
more frequently than the other data.
One disadvantage of an alphabetic derivation code occurs when the alphabetic portion is small 
(for example, the name Po) or when the name contains fewer consonants than the code requires. 
The name Roe has only one consonant and would have to be derived as RXX or derived using 
some other scheme. Another disadvantage is that some of the data may change. Changing one’s 
address or name would change the primary key for the file.
FIGURE 15.1
Using a simple sequence code to 
indicate the sequence in which 
orders enter a custom furniture 
shop.
Order #
5676       Rocking Chair/with Bamboo         Feng Xu
5677       Dining Room Chair/Upholstered   Millie Monice
5678       Love Seat/Upholstered                 J. & D. Yang
5679       Child’s Rocking Chair/Decals        Chelsea Kennard
 Product           Customer
FIGURE 15.2
Identifying the account of a 
magazine subscriber with an 
alphabetic derivation code.
Code   Explanation of Code
68506KND7533ECO            99999XXX9999XXX
Abbreviation of magazine
First ﬁve digits of zip code
First three consonants in last name
Four digits of street address


===== BOOK PAGE 475 =====

CHAPTER 15  •  DEsIgnIng A CCuRATE  D ATA  EnTR y PR oCEDuREs     475
FIGURE 15.4
Problems in using a one-letter 
classification code occur when 
categories share the same letter.
Code   Tax-Deductible Item
Interest Payments
Medical Payments
Taxes
Contributions
Dues
Supplies
Subscriptions
Computer
Insurance
Miscellaneous
 Subscriptions
 Computer
 Insurance
I
M
T
C
D
S
S
C
I
M
B
P
N
These duplicate
codes . . . 
. . . are corrected
by “forcing” the
codes to ﬁt.
Classifying Information
Classification affords the ability to distinguish among classes of items. Classifications are necessary 
for many purposes, such as reflecting what parts of a medical insurance plan an employee carries 
or showing which students have completed the core requirements of their coursework.
To be useful, classes must be mutually exclusive. For example, if a student is in class F, 
meaning first-year, having completed 0 to 36 credit hours, they should not also be classifiable as 
a sophomore (S). Overlapping classes would be =−F0 36 credit hours, =−S3 2 64 credit 
hours, and so on. Data are unclear and not as readily interpretable when coding classes are not 
mutually exclusive.
Classification Codes. Classification codes are used to distinguish one group of data with special 
characteristics from another. Classification codes can consist of either a single letter or a number. 
Using them is a shorthand way of describing a person, place, thing, or event.
Classification codes are listed in manuals or posted so that users can locate them easily. Many 
times, users become so familiar with frequently used codes that they memorize them. A user clas-
sifies an item and then enters its code directly into an online system.
An example of classification coding is the way you may wish to group tax-deductible items for 
the purpose of completing your income taxes. Figure 15.3 shows how codes are developed  
for items such as interest, medical payments, contributions, and so on. The coding system is 
simple; use the first letter of each of the categories: contributions are C, interest payments are  
I, and supplies are S.
All goes well until we get to other categories (such as computer items, insurance payments, 
and subscriptions) that begin with the same letters previously used. Figure 15.4 demonstrates 
what happens in this case. The coding was stretched so that we could use P for “comPuter,”  
N for “iNsurance,” and B for “suBscriptions.” Obviously, this situation is far from perfect. One 
way to avoid this type of confusion is to allow for codes longer than one letter, discussed later 
in this chapter in the section “Mnemonic Codes.” Pull-down menus in a graphical user interface 
(GUI) system often use classification codes as a shortcut for running menu features, such as Alt-F 
for the File menu.
FIGURE 15.3
Grouping tax-deductible items 
through the use of a one-letter 
classification code.
Code
I
M
T
C
D
S
Tax-Deductible Item
Supplies
Dues
Contributions
Taxes
Medical Payments
Interest Payments


===== BOOK PAGE 476 =====

476    PART V  •  Qu ALITy  A ssuRAnCE AnD IMPLEMEnTATIon
Block Sequence Codes. Earlier we discussed sequence codes. The block sequence code is an 
extension of the sequence code. Figure 15.5 shows how a business user assigns numbers to 
computer software. Main categories of software are browsers, database packages, and web design. 
These were assigned sequential numbers in the following “blocks,” or ranges: browser, 100–199; 
database, 200–299; and so forth. The advantage of the block sequence code is that the data are 
grouped according to common characteristics but still take advantage of the simplicity of assigning 
the next available number (within the block, of course) to the next item needing identification.
Concealing Information
You can use codes to conceal or disguise information you do not wish others to know. There 
are many reasons a business user may want to do this. For example, a corporation may not want 
information in a personnel file to be accessed by data-entry workers. A store may want its sales-
people to know the wholesale price to show them how low a price they can negotiate, but they 
may encode it on price tickets to prevent customers from finding that out. A restaurant may want 
to capture information about the service without letting the customer know the name of the server. 
Concealing information and security have become very important in the last few years. Corpora-
tions have started to allow vendors and customers to access their databases directly, and handling 
business transactions over the internet has made it necessary to develop tight encryption schemes. 
The following subsection describes an example of concealing information through codes.
Cipher Codes. Perhaps the simplest coding method is the direct substitution of one letter for 
another, one number for another, or one letter for a number. A popular type of puzzle called a 
cryptogram is an example of letter substitution. Figure 15.6 shows an example of a cipher code 
FIGURE 15.5
Using a block sequence code to 
group similar software.
Code Name of Software Package Type
100
101
102
103
200
201
202
300
301
302
Apple Safari
Mozilla Firefox 
Microsoft Edge
Google Chrome
Microsoft Access 
MySQL
Oracle 
Adobe Dreamweaver
Webﬂow
BlueGriffon
Browser
Database
Web design 
.
.
.
.
.
.
FIGURE 15.6
Encoding markdown prices with a 
cipher code is a way of concealing 
price information from customers.
Code        Meaning          Example of Price Ticket Explanation
B 1  GOLDEN’S  Store Name
L 2  202-395-40  Style Code
E 3  BIMC  Coded Markdown Price
A 4
C 5
H 6   Size 12 Size of Garment
M 7
 I 8   $25.00 Customer Price
N 9
D 0
    Regular Price of Dress = $25.00
    Markdown Ticket Encoded BIMC = $18.75


===== BOOK PAGE 477 =====

CHAPTER 15  •  DEsIgnIng A CCuRATE  D ATA  EnTR y PR oCEDuREs     477
taken from a Buffalo, New York, department store that coded all markdown prices with the words 
BLEACH MIND. No one really remembered why those words were chosen, but all the employees 
knew them by heart, and so the cipher code was successful. Notice in this figure that an item 
with a retail price of $25.00 would have a markdown price of BIMC, or $18.75, when decoded 
letter-by-letter.
Revealing Information
Sometimes it is desirable to reveal information to specific users through a code. In a clothing 
store, information about the department, product, color, and size is printed along with the price 
on the ticket for each item. This information helps the salespeople and stock people locate the 
place for the merchandise.
Another reason for revealing information through codes is to make the data entry more mean-
ingful for humans. A familiar part number, name, or description supports more accurate data entry. 
The examples of codes in the following subsection explain how these concepts can be realized.
Significant-Digit Subset Codes. When it is possible to describe a product by virtue of its mem-
bership in many subgroups, we can use a significant-digit subset code to help describe it. The 
clothing store price ticket example in Figure 15.7 is an example of an effective significant-digit 
subset code.
To the casual observer or customer, the item description appears to be one long number.  
A salesperson knows, however, that the number is made up of a few smaller numbers, each one 
having a meaning of its own. The first three digits represent the department, the next three the 
product, the next two the color, and the last two the size.
Significant-digit subset codes may consist of either information that actually describes the 
product (for example, the number 10 means size 10) or numbers that are arbitrarily assigned (for 
instance, 202 is assigned to mean the maternity department). In this case, the advantage of using 
FIGURE 15.7
Using a significant-digit subset 
code helps employees locate 
items belonging to a particular 
department.
2023954010 Red maternity dress, 
  style 395, size 10 
4142191912 Beige winter coat, 
  style 219, size 12
   202 395 40 10
    
   
     
       
Code Merchandise Described Explanation of Code
Size
(Size 12)
Size
(Size 10)
Color
(Beige)
Color
(Red)
Product
(Coat Style 219)
Product
(Dress Style 395)
Department
(Winter Coats)
Department
(Maternity)
414 219             19               12


===== BOOK PAGE 478 =====

478    PART V  •  Qu ALITy  A ssuRAnCE AnD IMPLEMEnTATIon
a significant-digit subset code is that it makes it possible to locate items that belong to a certain 
group or class. For example, if the store’s manager decided to mark down all winter merchandise 
for an upcoming sale, salespeople could locate all items belonging to departments 310 through 
449, the block of codes used to designate “winter” in general.
Mnemonic Codes. A mnemonic (pronounced nî-môn´-ïk) is a human memory aid. Any code that 
helps either a data-entry person remember how to enter the data or a user remember how to use 
the information can be considered a mnemonic code. Using a combination of letters and symbols 
affords a strikingly clear way to code a product so that the code is easily seen and understood.
The city hospital codes formerly used by the Buffalo Regional Blood Center were mnemonic, 
as shown in Figure 15.8. The simple codes were invented precisely because the blood center 
administrators and systems analysts wanted to ensure that hospital codes were easy to memorize 
and recall. Mnemonic codes for the hospitals helped lessen the possibility of blood being shipped to  
the wrong hospital.
Unicode. Codes allow us to reveal characters that we normally cannot input or view. Traditional 
keyboards support character sets that are familiar to people using Western alphabetic characters 
(referred to as Latin characters), but many languages, such as Greek, Japanese, Chinese, and 
Hebrew, do not use the Western alphabet. These languages may use Greek letters or glyphs or 
symbols representing syllables or whole words. The International Organization for Standardiza-
tion has defined the Unicode character set, which includes all standard language symbols and has 
room for 65,535 characters. You can display web pages written in other alphabets by downloading 
an input method editor from Microsoft.
Glyph symbols are represented using an “&#xnnnn;” notation, in which nnnn represents a 
specific letter or symbol and x means that hexadecimal notation, or base 16 numbering, is used 
to represent the Unicode characters. For example, &#30B3 represents the Japanese Katakana 
symbol ko. The code used for the Japanese word for hello, konichiwa, is &#x3053;&#x306B;&#
x3061;&#x308F. In Japanese, the word looks like this:
Unicode characters are grouped by language and may be found at www.unicode.org.
Requesting Appropriate Action
Codes are often needed to instruct either a computer or a decision maker about what action to 
take. Such codes are generally referred to as function codes, and they typically take the form of 
either sequence or mnemonic codes.
Function Codes. The functions that an analyst or a programmer desires a computer to perform 
with data are captured in function codes. Spelling out precisely what activities are to be accom-
plished is translated into a short numeric or alphanumeric code.
Figure 15.9 shows examples of a function code for updating inventory. Suppose you managed 
a dairy department; if a case of yogurt spoiled, you would use the code 3 to indicate this event. 
Of course, data required for input vary, depending on what function is needed. For example, 
FIGURE 15.8
Mnemonic codes function 
as memory aids by using a 
meaningful combination of letters 
and numbers.
City Hospitals
BGH Buffalo General Hospital
ROS Roswell Park Memorial Institute
KEN Kenmore Mercy
DEA Deaconess Hospital
SIS Sisters of Charity
STF Saint Francis Hospital
STJ Saint Joseph’s Hospital
OLV Our Lady of Victory Hospital
Code


===== BOOK PAGE 479 =====

CHAPTER 15  •  DEsIgnIng A CCuRATE  D ATA  EnTR y PR oCEDuREs     479
appending or updating a record would require only the record key and function code, whereas 
adding a new record would require all data elements to be input, including the function code.
General Guidelines for Coding
In the previous sections, we examined the purposes for using different types of codes when 
humans and machines enter and store data. Next, we examine a few heuristics for establishing a 
coding system. These rules are highlighted in Figure 15.10.
Be Concise. Codes should be concise. Overly long codes mean more keystrokes and consequently 
more errors. Long codes also mean that storing the information in a database will require more 
memory.
Short codes are easier for people to remember and easier to enter than long codes. If codes 
must be long, they should be broken up into subcodes. For example, 5678923453127 could be 
broken up with hyphens as follows: 5678-923-453-127. This approach is much more manage-
able and takes advantage of the way people are known to process information in short chunks. 
Sometimes codes are made longer than necessary for a reason. Credit card numbers are often 
long to prevent people from guessing a credit card number. Visa and MasterCard use 16-digit 
numbers, which would accommodate 9 trillion customers. Because the numbers are not assigned 
sequentially, chances of guessing a credit card number are very slight.
Keep the Codes Stable. Stability means that the identification code for a customer should not 
change each time new data are received. Earlier, we presented an alphabetic derivation code for a 
magazine subscription list. The expiration date was not part of the subscriber identification code 
because it was likely to change.
Don’t change the code abbreviations in a mnemonic system. Once you have chosen the code 
abbreviations, do not try to revise them because that makes it extremely difficult for data-entry 
personnel to adapt.
Ensure that Codes Are Unique. For codes to work, they must be unique. Make a note of all codes 
used in the system to ensure that you are not assigning the same code number or name to different 
items. Code numbers and names are an essential part of the entries in data dictionaries, discussed 
in Chapter 8.
FIGURE 15.9
Function codes compactly  
capture functions that a computer 
must perform.
Code Function
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Delivered
Sold
Spoiled
Lost or Stolen
Returned
Transferred Out
Transferred In
Journal Entry (Add)
Journal Entry (Subtract)
FIGURE 15.10
There are eight general guidelines 
for establishing a coding system.
In Establishing a Coding System,
 the Analyst Should:
 Keep codes concise
 Keep codes stable
 Make codes that are unique
 Allow codes to be sortable
 Avoid confusing codes
 Keep codes uniform
 Allow for modiﬁcation of codes
 Make codes meaningful


===== BOOK PAGE 480 =====

480    PART V  •  Qu ALITy  A ssuRAnCE AnD IMPLEMEnTATIon
Allow Codes to be Sortable. If you are going to manipulate the data usefully, the codes must be 
sortable. For example, if you were to perform a text search on the months of the year in English in 
ascending order, the “J” months would be out of order (January, July, and then June). Dictionaries 
are sorted in this way, one letter at a time from left to right. So, if you sorted MMMDDYYYY 
where the MMM stood for the abbreviation for the month, DD for the day, and YYYY for the 
year, the result would be in error.
Figure 15.11 shows what would happen if a text search were performed on different forms 
of the date. The third column shows a problem that was part of the year 2000 (Y2K) crisis that 
caused some alarm and even made the cover of Time magazine.
It is important to make sure users can do what you intend them to do with the codes you 
create. Numeric codes are much easier to sort than alphanumerics; therefore, consider converting 
to numerics wherever practical.
FIGURE 15.11
Plan ahead in order to be able to 
do something useful with data 
that have been entered. In this 
example, the person creating the 
codes did not realize the data 
would have to be sorted.
Incorrect Sorting
Using 
MMM-DD-YYYY
Incorrect Sorting
Using 
MM-DD-YYYY
Incorrect Sorting
(Year 2000 Problem) 
YY-MM-DD
Correct Sorting
Using 
YYYY-MM-DD
Dec-25-1998
Dec-31-1997
Jul-04-1999
Jun-04-1998
Jun-11-2000
Jun-12-1997
Oct-24-1998
06-04-1998
06-11-2000
06-12-1997
07-04-1999
10-24-1998
12-25-1998
12-31-1997
00-06-11
97-06-12
97-12-31
98-06-04
98-10-24
98-12-25
99-07-04
1997-06-12
1997-12-31
1998-06-04
1998-10-24
1998-12-25
1999-07-04
2000-06-11
“You know, we used to have it like that, but when they got all the 
new computers and went to 24-hour phone and internet orders, it 
all changed. They said the operators (and users) had to know more 
about what they were selling (or buying), so they changed their 
codes to be more like a story.”
Morio, surprised at Ngendo’s revelation, asks, “What’s the story 
for the one I was working on?”
Inspecting the code on the lantern’s picking slip, Ngendo 
replies, “The one you were working on was ‘PO LAN LED 2pk–6 
AA bat req.’ After looking it up real fast on the computer the person 
at the service desk can tell the customer, ‘It’s a portable survival 
lantern with LED lights for camping that comes in a pack of two 
lanterns. You’ll need to supply six AA batteries for each. They’re 
not included.” We can’t see the forest for the trees because of their 
codes, but you know M. Henson’s. They’ve got to make the sale and 
reach the summit.”
How important is it that the warehouse bins and invoices are 
coded inconsistently? Respond in a paragraph. What are some 
of the problems created when a code appears to be a mnemonic, 
but employees are never given an appropriate “key” to decode it? 
Discuss your response in two paragraphs. What changes would you 
make to invoice/warehouse coding for M. Henson’s? Document 
your changes, identify the type of code you would use, and use 
the code in an example of a product that M. Henson’s might sell. 
Remember to decipher it as well.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 15.1 
It’s a Wilderness in Here
“I can’t stand this. I’ve been looking for this lantern for the last 
45 minutes,” complains Morio Fuyuki, as he nervously pushes an 
on/off button switch on a portable camp lantern he is holding. He is 
one of the new warehouse workers for M. Henson’s, a large retail 
catalog and ecommerce firm specializing in camping goods and 
items for Arctic and other expeditions. “The catalog slip calls it a 
‘PO LAN LED 2pk–6 AA bat req.’ Good thing you told me ‘LAN’ 
stands for lantern. I thought it stood for local area network, so I was 
looking over there in the ethernet cables. I found it here in this bin 
labeled Camp/Lights. Wouldn’t it be easier if the catalog and web 
pages matched the bins? To me, this invoice says, ‘Purchase order, 
local area network, 2 pack of batteries required.’ I’ve been stranded 
in network cabling the whole time.”
Ngendo Tamba, Morio’s coworker, barely listens as she hur -
riedly pulls items out of bins to fill another order. “You’ll get used 
to it. They’ve got to have it this way so that the computers can 
understand the bill later. Mostly, I look at the catalog page number 
on the invoice, then I look it up in the book and sort of translate it to 
back here . . . unless I remember it from finding it before,” Ngendo 
explains.
Morio persists, saying, “Computers are smart, though, and we 
have to fill so many orders. We should tell the people up in billing 
the names we’ve got on our bins.”
Ngendo replies somewhat sarcastically “Oh, sure. They’re 
dying to know what we think.” Then she continues in a quieter tone.


===== BOOK PAGE 481 =====

CHAPTER 15  •  DEsIgnIng A CCuRATE  D ATA  EnTR y PR oCEDuREs     481
Avoid Confusing Codes. Try to avoid using coding characters that look or sound alike. The charac-
ters O (the letter oh) and 0 (the number zero) are easily confused, as are the letter I and the number 1 
and the letter Z and the number 2. Therefore, codes such as B1C and 280Z are unsatisfactory.
One example of a potentially confusing code is the Canadian Postal Code, as shown in 
Figure 15.12. The code format is X9X 9X9, where X stands for a letter and 9 stands for a number. 
One advantage to using letters in the code is to allow more data in a six-digit code (there are 
26 letters, but only 10 numbers). Because the code is used on a regular basis by Canadians, the 
code makes perfectly good sense to them. To foreigners sending mail to Canada, however, it may 
be difficult to tell if the second-to-last symbol is a Z or a 2.
Keep the Codes Uniform. To be effective and efficient for humans, codes need to follow readily 
perceived forms most of the time. Codes used together, such as BUF-234 and KU-3456, are poor 
because the first contains three letters and three numbers, whereas the second has only two letters 
followed by four numbers.
When you are required to add dates, try to avoid using the codes MMDDYYYY in one 
application, YYYYDDMM in a second, and MMDDYY in a third. It is important to keep codes 
uniform among, as well as within, programs.
FIGURE 15.12
Combining look-alike characters 
in codes can result in errors.Handwritten Code Actual Code City, Province Problem
L8S 4M4
T3A ZE5
LOS 1JO
L8S 4M4
T3A 2E5
L0S 1J0
Hamilton, Ontario
Calgary, Alberta
Niagara-on-the-Lake,
Ontario
S looks like a 5
2 looks like a Z
5 looks like an S
Zero and Oh look alike
S looks like a 5
1 looks like an l
Code Format for Canadian Postal Code
X9X 9X9
the last orders. So, a committee decided to make the cities more 
recognizable by having them add two letters. Those kids can’t learn 
everything we know overnight, even though they try. It’s just until 
August 19, though, when the interns go back to school.”
As Kenya glumly turns back to her keyboard, Asuka shakes her 
head sympathetically and says, “I know it’s a strain and it’s making 
you feel miserable, but don’t worry. You’ll get over it. It’s just a 
summer code.”
What general guidelines of coding has management overlooked 
in its decision to use a summer code for cities? Make a list of them. 
What is the effect on full-time data-entry personnel of changing 
codes for the ease of temporary help? Respond in two paragraphs. 
What future impact could the temporary change in codes have on 
sorting and retrieving data entered during the summer period? Take 
two paragraphs to discuss these implications. What changes can you 
suggest so that the part-timers don’t get mixed up on codes in the short 
term? In a memo to the supervisor of this work group, make a list of 
five to seven changes in the data-capture or data-entry procedures 
that can be made to accommodate short-term hires without disrupting 
normal business. In a paragraph, indicate how this goal can be accom-
plished without marring the productivity of data-entry personnel.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 15.2 
Catching a Summer Code
K enya Okeke takes her fingers off her keyboard and bends over 
her workstation to verify the letters on the invoices stacked in front 
of her. “What on earth?” Kenya asks aloud as she further scruti-
nizes the letters that encode cities where orders are to be shipped.
Asuka Akemi, her supervisor, who usually sits a couple of 
workstations away, is passing by and sees Kenya’s consternation. 
“What’s the matter? Did the sales rep forget to write in the city 
code again?”
Kenya swings around in her chair to face Asuka. “No, there are 
codes here, but they’re weird. We usually use a three-letter code, right? 
Like CIN for Cincinnati, SEA for Seattle, MIN for Minneapolis, BUF 
for Buffalo. They’re all five-letter codes here, though.”
“Look,” Kenya says, lifting the invoice to show Asuka. “CINNC, 
SEATT, MINNE. It’ll take me all day to enter these. No kidding, 
it’s really slowing me down. Maybe there’s a mistake. Can’t I just 
use the standard?”
Asuka backs away from Kenya’s workstation as if the prob-
lem were contagious. Excusing herself apologetically, Asuka says, 
“It’s the interns. They are learning sales now, and management 
was worried that they’d get messed up on their cities. I think it 
has something to do with mixing up Newark and New Orleans on


===== BOOK PAGE 482 =====

482    PART V  •  Qu ALITy  A ssuRAnCE AnD IMPLEMEnTATIon
Allow for Modification of Codes. Adaptability is a key feature of a good code. An analyst must 
keep in mind that the system will evolve over time, and the coding system should be able to 
encompass change. The number of customers should grow, customers will change names, and 
suppliers will modify the way they number their products. An analyst needs to be able to forecast 
the predictable changes that business users will desire and anticipate a wide range of future needs 
when designing codes.
Make Codes Meaningful. Unless the analyst wants to hide information intentionally, codes should 
be meaningful. Effective codes not only contain information, but they also make sense to the 
people using them. Meaningful codes are easy to understand, work with, and recall. The job of 
data entry becomes more interesting when working with meaningful codes instead of just entering 
a series of meaningless numbers.
Using Codes. Codes are used in a number of ways. In validation programs, input data is checked 
against a list of codes to ensure that only valid codes have been entered. In report and inquiry 
programs, a code stored on a file is transformed into the meaning of the code. Reports and 
displays should not show or print the actual code. If they did, the user would have to memorize 
code meanings or look them up in a manual. Codes are used in GUI programs to create drop-
down lists.
EFFECTIVE AND EFFICIENT DATA CAPTURE
To ensure the quality of data users enter into a system, it is important to capture data effectively. 
Data capture has received increasing attention as the point in information processing at which 
excellent productivity gains can be made. Great progress in improving data capture has been made 
in the last four decades, as we have moved from multiple-step, slow, and error-prone systems such 
as keypunching to sophisticated systems including such things as optical character recognition 
(OCR), bar codes, and point-of-sale terminals.
Deciding What to Capture
The decision about what to capture precedes user interaction with the system. Indeed, it is vital 
in making the eventual interface worthwhile, for the adage “garbage in, garbage out” is still true.
Decisions about what data to capture for system input are made among systems analysts and 
systems users. Much of what will be captured is specific to the particular business. Capturing data, 
inputting them, storing them, and retrieving them are all costly endeavors. With all these factors 
in mind, determining what to capture becomes an important decision.
There are two types of data to enter: data that change or vary with every transaction, and data 
that concisely differentiate the particular item being processed from all other items.
An example of changeable data is the quantity of supplies purchased each time an advertis-
ing firm places an order with the office supply wholesaler. Because quantities change depending 
on the number of employees at the advertising firm and on how many accounts they are servicing, 
quantity data must be entered each time an order is placed.
An example of differentiation data is the inclusion on a patient record of the patient’s Social 
Security number and the first three letters of their last name. In this way, the patient is uniquely 
differentiated from other patients in the same system.
Letting the Computer Do the Rest
When considering what data to capture for each transaction and what data to leave to the system 
to enter, a systems analyst must take advantage of what computers do best. For the advertising 
agency ordering office supplies, it is not necessary for the operator entering the stationary order 
to reenter each item description each time an order is received. The computer can store and access 
this information easily.
Computers can automatically handle repetitive tasks, such as recording the time of the 
transaction, calculating new values from input, and storing and retrieving data on demand. By 
employing the best features of computers, efficient data-capture design avoids needless data entry, 
which in turn alleviates much human error and boredom and permits people to focus on higher-
level or creative tasks. Software can be written to ask the user to enter today’s date or capture the


===== BOOK PAGE 483 =====

CHAPTER 15  •  DEsIgnIng A CCuRATE  D ATA  EnTR y PR oCEDuREs     483
date from the computer’s internal clock. Once entered, the system proceeds to use that date on all 
transactions processed in that data-entry session.
A prime example of reusing data entered once is the Online Computer Library Center 
(OCLC), used by thousands of libraries in the United States. OCLC was built on the idea that 
each item bought by a library should have to be cataloged only once for all time. Once an item is 
entered, cataloging information goes into the huge OCLC database and is shared with participating 
libraries. In this case, implementation of the simple concept of entering data only once has saved 
enormous data-entry time.
The calculating power of the computer should be considered when deciding what not to reenter. 
Computers are adept at long calculations, using data already entered. For example, a person doing 
data entry may enter the flight numbers and account number of an air trip taken by a customer 
belonging to a frequent-flyer incentive program. The computer then calculates the number of 
miles accrued for each flight, adds it to the miles already in the customer’s account, and updates 
the total miles accrued to the account. The computer also may flag an account that, by virtue 
of the large number of miles flown, is now eligible for an award. Although all this information 
may appear on the customer’s updated account, the only new data entered were the flight numbers 
of the flights flown.
In systems that use a graphical user interface, codes are often stored either as a function or  
as a separate table in the database. There is a trade-off on creating too many tables because 
the software must find matching records from each table, which may lead to slow access. If the  
codes are relatively stable and rarely change, they may be stored as a database function.  
If the codes change frequently, they are stored on a table for easy updating.
Figure 15.13 shows how a drop-down list is used to select the codes for adding or changing 
a record in the CUSTOMER table. Notice that the code is stored, but the drop-down list displays 
both the code and the code meaning. This method helps to ensure accuracy because the user does 
not have to guess at the meaning of the code and there is no chance of typing an invalid code.
Avoiding Bottlenecks and Extra Steps
A bottleneck in data entry is an apt allusion to the physical appearance of a bottle. Data are poured 
rapidly into the wide mouth of the system only to be slowed in its “neck” because of an artificially 
created instance of insufficient processing for the volume or detail of data being entered. One 
way a bottleneck can be avoided is by ensuring that there is enough capacity to handle the data 
being entered.
Ways to avoid extra steps are determined not only at the time of analysis but also when users 
begin to interact with prototypes of the system. The fewer steps involved in inputting data, the 
FIGURE 15.13
A table of codes used in a drop-
down list shown in Microsoft 
Access. This list is used to select 
a code for adding or changing 
an item in a record. (Used with 
permission from Microsoft)


===== BOOK PAGE 484 =====

484    PART V  •  Qu ALITy  A ssuRAnCE AnD IMPLEMEnTATIon
fewer chances there are for the introduction of errors. Beyond the obvious consideration of saved 
labor, avoiding extra steps is a way to preserve the quality of data. Once again, use of an online, 
real-time system that captures customer data without necessitating the completion of a form is an 
excellent example of saving steps in data entry.
Starting with a Good Form
Effective data capture is achievable only if prior thought is given to what the source document 
should contain. A data-entry operator inputs data from the source document (usually some kind 
of form); this document is the source of a large amount of all system data. Online systems (or 
special data-entry methods such as bar codes) may circumvent the need for a source document, 
but often some kind of paper form, such as a receipt, is created anyway.
With effective forms, it is not necessary to reenter information that the computer has already 
stored, or data such as time or date of entry that the computer can determine automatically. 
Chapter 12 discussed in detail how a form or source document should be designed to maximize its 
usefulness for capturing data and to minimize the time users need to spend entering data from it.
Choosing a Data-Entry Method
Several efficient data-entry methods are available and choosing one of them is shaped by many 
factors, including the need for speed, accuracy, and user training; the cost of the data-entry method 
(whether it is materials or labor intensive); and the methods currently in use in the organization.
Keyboards. Keyboarding is the oldest method of data entry, and certainly it is the one with 
which organization members are most familiar. Some improvements have been made over the 
years to improve keyboards. Features include special function keys to open programs, keys used 
to scroll and explore the web, and keys that can be programmed with macros to reduce the number 
of keystrokes required. Ergonomic keyboards and infrared or Bluetooth-enabled keyboards and 
mice are big improvements as well.
Bar Codes. Bar codes typically appear on product labels, and they also appear on patient iden-
tification bracelets in hospitals and in almost any context in which a person or object needs to be 
checked into and out of any kind of inventory system. Many bar-coded labels include information 
for a particular product: the manufacturer identification number, the product identification number, 
a code to verify the scan’s accuracy (such as a check-digit), and codes to mark the beginning and 
end of the scan.
Bar codes can be thought of as metacodes, or codes encoding codes, because they appear 
as a series of bars or objects that encodes numbers or letters. These symbols in turn have access 
to product data stored in computer memory. Until recently, scanners were needed to read linear 
codes, or one-dimensional codes, but today the camera in mobile phones or the camera built into 
your iPhone can read universal product codes (UPCs). An inexpensive app such as Delicious 
Library (www.delicious-monster.com) can be used to scan one-dimensional bar codes and create 
a database of all of your movies, music, books, software, or games.
Matrix bar code squares are two-dimensional bar codes. They are still optical, machine-
readable codes, and they take up much less space than the older linear bar codes. They are cheaper 
than RFID tags (discussed in an upcoming section) and can appear in print. There are more than 
30 different versions of these bar codes in existence. These different codes are known generally 
as 2D bar codes. Both types of bar codes are shown in Figure 15.14. Users can get apps for their 
mobile phones that will read these codes and direct them to their respective web pages.
QR Codes. Quick response (QR) codes were first created in 1994 by DENSO WA VE, a Toyota 
subsidiary at that time. QR codes have been used in Japan and South Korea for some time. They 
are plentiful in the United States now and have the potential to become the dominant 2D bar code 
in the world.
A QR code is easily identifiable by the position marker (which looks like three nested squares) 
that appears in three of its corners. QR codes are completely free as the license holder has chosen 
not to exercise their rights.
2D code readers feature a couple of codes but are likely to be able to read a QR code. You 
can easily find more QR creators.


===== BOOK PAGE 485 =====

CHAPTER 15  •  DEsIgnIng A CCuRATE  D ATA  EnTR y PR oCEDuREs     485
Rutgers Law School is a leading national school for legal education. The Rutgers Camden 
Information Technology Department development team generates QR codes for all school events 
and electronically sends them to the school’s digital signage system. Each code provides the user 
with a link to the event’s web page, giving users a way to easily view event data, register for an 
event, and add the event to a mobile calendar.
QR codes are being placed outside student study rooms as well, allowing students to self-
schedule reservations and activate video recording capabilities. Study room recordings of practice 
sessions are then sent to the student’s mobile device and can be viewed instantly. QR codes can 
be used in imaginative ways. Figure 15.15 lists some ideas.
There are many advantages to incorporating 2D codes in your designs. Almost everyone in 
business already owns and uses a device (such as a smartphone) that can read different types of 
bar codes. The 2D codes are either nonproprietary or free. Barcoding affords an extraordinarily 
high degree of accuracy for data entry. Furthermore, 2D codes can be generated easily by using 
a Web-based creator or a stand-alone app.
One of the disadvantages of 2D codes is the ease with which a printed code can be stickered 
over or tampered with. There is growing concern that users of smartphones are vulnerable to 
malicious attacks launched when an unsuspecting user scans QR codes indiscriminately without 
checking whether the QR code is a genuine, authorized one. Some QR codes have built-in security 
that permit Android or iOS users to scan a code and find out instantly whether it is malicious or will 
cause users to go to a malicious website before it is loaded into the user’s browser. Unfortunately, 
many users and even designers are unaware of the potential risks of bar codes, which means you 
must remain vigilant regarding what websites the QR code is directing users to.
RFID. Radio frequency identification (RFID) allows the automatic collection of data. It uses 
RFID tags or transponders, each of which contains a chip and an antenna. An RFID tag may or 
FIGURE 15.14
Examples of one-dimensional and 
two-dimensional bar codes.
One-Dimensional UPC Code
Two-Dimensional QR Code
FIGURE 15.15
Two-dimensional bar codes 
can be used in many ways.
QR Codes Can
•  Take you to a speciﬁc web page
•  Find the item you want for purchase at a lower price
•  Initiate an email, SMS text message, or make a phone call
•  Find and capture a digital coupon
•  Use a digital coupon
•  Tell you more about the art gallery painting you are gazing at
•  Get you information about the time and place of an event
•  Show you a promotional video for a movie, play, or concert
•  Allow you to view or extend the amount of money on a transit card


===== BOOK PAGE 486 =====

486    PART V  •  Qu ALITy  A ssuRAnCE AnD IMPLEMEnTATIon
may not have its own power source. If it does not have its own power, the antenna provides just 
enough power from an incoming signal to power the chip and transmit a response. RFID tags can 
be attached to products, packages, animals, and even humans so that the item or person can be 
identified using a radio frequency.
RFID tags, also called proximity cards because of their limited range, can be passive or active. 
Passive RFID tags have no internal power source; active tags do. Passive tags are inexpensive (less 
than 5 cents per tag) and are typically the size of a postage stamp. They are used in large retail 
stores, including Walmart and Target. Walmart has been actively pursuing RFID technology 
in improving its inventory management and supply-chain processes. RFID tags can be used to 
transmit data to a blockchain that securely stores, shares, and updates a supply chain.
Active tags are much more reliable than passive ones because they have their own power 
supply. The U.S. Department of Defense has used these tags to minimize logistics costs and to 
increase supply-chain visibility. Active tags cost a few dollars each.
To capture the data on an RFID tag, a reader is required. The reader activates the tag so that 
it can be read. The reader decodes the data and the unique product code on the chip inside the tag 
and passes it along to a host computer that processes the data.
One example is an electronic toll pass used in vehicles traversing toll roads. An RFID 
transponder can be attached to the windshield and read every time the vehicle passes through a 
tollbooth. The tollbooth’s RFID reader can also act as a writer to store a balance on the RFID chip.
The Moscow Metro was the first transportation system to use RFID smartcards in 1998. Other 
applications include tracking cattle to identify the herd of origin, which enables better tracking 
of mad cow disease, and RFID tracking in bookstores, airline baggage services, pharmaceuticals, 
and even tracking patients or inmates.
RFID tags have found common use in most shipping applications. The technology will soon 
be used in general electronic cash transactions. They may even replace UPCs because their advan-
tages include security (reducing the number of items stolen) and not requiring scanning (they can 
simply pass through the reader zone).
RFID is not without controversy. Privacy is a concern. An individual who pays for a tagged 
item using a credit card or a shoppers’ card could be identifiable with such a system.
A systems analyst needs to think of the users involved and their rights when considering 
whether this technology is suited for an application.
Near Field Communication.  Another approach to inputting data is near field communication 
(NFC), which builds upon RFID. NFC allows two-way communication and is used in contactless 
payment systems at checkout counters and other venues. Customers simply use a smartphone such 
as an Android with Google Pay or an Apple device (such as an Apple watch or iPhone) to touch 
or come close to the point-of-sale device to establish radio communications.
NFC can be used for payment on transportation systems, to exchange information (such as 
a schedule or map), receive custom coupons, or exchange business cards. It is considered secure 
because of its short range of communication and the complexity of its security layers.
Optical Character Recognition. Optical character recognition (OCR) lets a user read input 
from a source document (handwritten or printed) with an optical scanner rather than off the mag-
netic media we have been discussing so far. Using OCR devices can speed data input from 60 to 
90 percent over some keying methods.
The increased speed of OCR comes through not having to encode or key in data from 
source documents. It eliminates many of the time-consuming and error-fraught steps of other 
input devices. In doing so, OCR demands few employee skills and commensurately less training, 
resulting in fewer errors and less time spent by employees in redundant efforts. It also decen-
tralizes responsibility for quality data directly to the unit that is generating it. OCR, which has 
become available to all, has one additional, highly practical use: the transformation of faxes into 
documents that can be edited. (Note that although faxes have been replaced by many other input 
and output technologies, they are still stubbornly dispersed throughout businesses such as private 
medical offices, law enforcement agencies, and even fast-food delivery restaurants, so they still 
are serving a purpose in many businesses.)
Magnetic Ink Character Recognition. Magnetic ink characters are found on the bottom of bank 
checks and some credit card bills. This method is akin to OCR in that special characters are read,


===== BOOK PAGE 487 =====

CHAPTER 15  •  DEsIgnIng A CCuRATE  D ATA  EnTR y PR oCEDuREs     487
but its use is limited. Data entry through magnetic ink character recognition (MICR) is done 
through a machine that reads and interprets a single line of material encoded with ink that is made 
up of magnetic particles.
Some advantages of using MICR are that (1) it is a reliable and high-speed method not sus-
ceptible to accepting stray marks (because they are not encoded magnetically); (2) if it is required 
on all withdrawal checks, it serves as a security measure against bad checks; and (3) data-entry 
personnel can see the numbers making up the code if it is necessary to verify the account number 
and check number.
Mark-Sense Forms. Mark-sense forms allow data entry through the use of a scanner that senses 
where marks have been made on special forms. A common usage is for scoring response sheets 
for questionnaires, as shown in Figure 15.16. Little training of data-entry personnel is necessary, 
and a high volume of forms can be processed quickly.
One drawback of mark-sense forms is that readers can determine whether a mark has been 
made but cannot interpret the mark in the way optical character readers do. Stray marks on forms 
FIGURE 15.16
A mark-sense form that can 
be read by a scanner speeds 
data entry.
DIRECTIONS FOR MARKING
Make heavy black marks that ﬁll the circle completely.
Erase cleanly any answer you wish to change—make no stray marks.
Examples of PROPER marks                          Examples of IMPROPER marks
1. What levels of people do you primarily serve in your work?
managers
supervisors; forepersons
other salaried
hourly
volunteers
2. Total size of the organization you serve:
less than 1,000 15,000–25,000
1,000–5,000 more than 25,000
5,000–15,000
3. What training and development techniques     
do you use? (Please mark each technique.)
lecture with or without media
ﬁlms
videotape closed-circuit TV
discussions (cases, issues, etc.)
role-playing
behavior modeling
simulation; advanced gaming
on-the-job training
job rotation
internships; assistantships
organization development techniques
other     
0 1 2 3 4 5
0 1 2 3 4 5
0 1 2 3 4 5
0 1 2 3 4 5
0 1 2 3 4 5
0 1 2 3 4 5
0 1 2 3 4 5
0 1 2 3 4 5
0 1 2 3 4 5
0 1 2 3 4 5
0 1 2 3 4 5
0 1 2 3 4 5
5.  A Most Signiﬁcant Part
4.  A Major Part
3.  A Substantial Part
2.  A Smaller Part
1.  A Minor Part
0.  Does Not Apply


===== BOOK PAGE 488 =====

488    PART V  •  Qu ALITy  A ssuRAnCE AnD IMPLEMEnTATIon
can be entered as incorrect data. In addition, choices are limited to the answers provided on the 
mark-sense form, forms have difficulty capturing alphanumeric data because of the space required 
for a complete set of letters and numbers, and it is easy for those filling out mark-sense forms to 
get confused and put a mark in an incorrect position.
ENSURING DATA QUALITY THROUGH INPUT VALIDATION
So far, we have discussed ensuring the effective capture of data onto source documents and the 
data’s efficient entry into the system through various input devices. Although these conditions are 
necessary for ensuring quality data, they alone are not sufficient.
Errors cannot be ruled out entirely, and the critical importance of catching errors during 
input, prior to processing and storage, cannot be overemphasized. The snarl of problems created 
by incorrect input can be a nightmare, not the least of which is that many problems take a 
long time to surface. The systems analyst must assume that errors in data will occur and must 
work with users to design input validation tests to prevent erroneous data from being processed 
and stored because initial errors that go undiscovered for long periods are expensive and time-
consuming to correct.
You cannot imagine everything that will go awry with input, but you must cover the kinds of 
errors that give rise to the largest percentage of problems. A summary of potential problems that 
must be considered when validating input is given in Figure 15.17.
Validating Input Transactions
Validating input transactions is largely done through software, which is a programmer’s respon-
sibility, but it is important that a systems analyst know what common problems might invalidate 
a transaction. Businesses committed to quality will include validity checks as part of their routine 
software.
Three main problems can occur with input transactions: submitting the wrong data to the 
system, an unauthorized person submitting data, or asking the system to perform an unacceptable 
function.
each invoice the date we fill the order, code numbers for the hamlet 
kits they order, a description of each kit, the price per item, and the 
quantity of each kit ordered. Of course, we also include the subtotals 
of kit charges, shipping charges, and the total that the warehouse 
owes us. No sales tax is added because they resell what we send 
them to toy stores in all 50 U.S. states and Puerto Rico. I want you 
to help us design a computerized order entry system that will be part 
of the invoicing system for Elsinore Industries.”
For your design of a data-entry system for Elsinore, take into 
consideration all the objectives for data entry discussed throughout 
this chapter. Draw any displays necessary to illustrate your design. 
How can you make the order-entry system efficient? Respond in a 
paragraph. Specify what data can be stored and retrieved and what 
data must be entered anew for each order. How can unnecessary 
work be avoided? Write a paragraph to explain why the system you 
propose is more efficient than the old one. How can data accuracy 
be ensured? List three strategies that will work with the type of data 
that are being entered for Elsinore Industries.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 15.3 
To Enter or Not to Enter: That Is the Question
“I’ve just taken on the presidency of Elsinore Industries,” says 
Rose N. Krantz. “We’re part of a small cottage industry that manu-
factures imaginative toy villages for children seven years old and 
up. Our tiny hamlets consist of various kits that will build whatever 
children want from interlocking plastic cubes, essentials such as 
city hall, the police station, the gas station, and an orange juice 
stand. Each kit has a unique part number from 200 to 800, but not 
every number is used. The wholesale prices vary from $54.95 for 
the city hall to $1.79 for an orange juice stand.
“I’ve been melancholy over what I’ve found out since signing 
on at Elsinore. ‘Something is rotten’ here, to quote a famous play-
wright. In fact, the invoicing system was so out of control that I’ve 
been working around the clock with our bookkeeper, Gilda Stern,” 
Krantz soliloquizes.
“I would like you to help straighten things out,” Rose continues. 
“We ship to 12 distribution warehouses around the country. Each 
invoice we write out includes the warehouse number, 1 through 12, 
its street address, and the U.S. postal code (zip code). We also put on


===== BOOK PAGE 489 =====

CHAPTER 15  •  DEsIgnIng A CCuRATE  D ATA  EnTR y PR oCEDuREs     489
Submitting the Wrong Data. An example of submitting the wrong data to the system is the attempt 
to input a patient’s Social Security number into a hospital’s payroll system. This error is usually 
an accidental one, but it should be flagged before data are processed.
An Unauthorized Person Submitting Data. A system should be able to discover whether otherwise 
correct data are submitted by an unauthorized person. For instance, only the supervising pharma-
cist should be able to enter inventory totals for controlled substances in the pharmacy. Invalidation 
of transactions submitted by an unauthorized individual applies to privacy and security concerns 
surrounding payroll systems and employee evaluation records that determine pay levels, promo-
tions, or discipline; files containing trade secrets; and files holding classified information, such 
as national defense data.
Asking the System to Perform an Unacceptable Function. The third error that invalidates input 
transactions is asking the system to perform an unacceptable function. For instance, it would be 
logical for a human resources manager to update the existing record of a current employee, but 
it would be invalid to ask the system to create a new file rather than merely to update an existing 
record.
Validating Input Data
It is essential that input data themselves, along with the transactions requested, be valid. Several 
tests can be incorporated into software to ensure this validity. In the following subsections, we 
consider a number of possible ways to validate input: test for missing data, test for correct 
field length, test for class or composition, test for range or reasonableness, test for invalid 
values, cross-reference checks, test for comparison with stored data, self-validating codes, 
and credit card verification.
Test for Missing Data. The first kind of validity test examines data to see if there are any missing 
items. For some situations, all  data items must be present. For example, a Social Security file 
for paying out retirement or disability benefits would be invalid if it did not include the payee’s 
Social Security number.
In addition, the record should include both the key data that distinguish one record from all 
others and the function code telling the computer what to do with the data. A systems analyst 
needs to interact with users to determine what data items are essential and to find out whether 
exceptional cases ever occur that would allow data to be considered valid even if some data items 
were missing. For example, a second address line containing an apartment number or a person’s 
middle initial may not be a required entry.
Test for Correct Field Length. A second kind of validity test checks input to ensure it is of the 
correct length for the field. For example, if the Omaha, Nebraska, weather station reports into 
the National Weather Service computer but mistakenly provides a two-letter city code (OM) 
instead of the national three-letter city code (OMA), the input data might be deemed invalid, and 
hence would not be processed.
FIGURE 15.17
Validating input is important 
to ensure that most potential 
problems with data are 
eliminated early.
This Type of
Validation Can Prevent These Problems
Validating Input
Transactions
Validating Input
Data
Submitting the wrong data
Data submitted by an unauthorized
person
Asking the system to perform an
unacceptable function
Missing data
Incorrect ﬁeld length
Data have unacceptable composition
Data are out of range
Data are invalid
Data do not match with stored data


===== BOOK PAGE 490 =====

490    PART V  •  Qu ALITy  A ssuRAnCE AnD IMPLEMEnTATIon
Test for Class or Composition. The test for class or composition validity checks to see that data 
fields that are supposed to be exclusively composed of numbers do not include letters, and vice 
versa. For example, a credit card account number for American Express should not include any 
letters. Using a composition test, the program should not accept an American Express account 
number that includes both letters and numbers.
Test for Range or Reasonableness. Validity tests for range or reasonableness are really com-
monsense measures of input that answer the question of whether data fall within an acceptable 
range or whether they are reasonable within predetermined parameters. For instance, if a user were 
trying to verify a proposed shipment date, the range test would neither permit a shipping date on 
the 32nd day of October nor accept shipment in the 13th month, the respective ranges being 1 to 
31 days and 1 to 12 months.
A reasonableness test ascertains whether the item makes sense for the transaction. For 
example, when adding a new employee to the payroll, entering an age of 120 years would not 
be reasonable. Reasonableness tests are used for data that are continuous, that is, data that have 
a smooth range of values. These tests can include a lower limit, an upper limit, or both a lower 
and an upper limit.
Test for Invalid Values. Checking input for invalid values works if there are only a few valid 
values. This test is not feasible for situations in which values are neither restricted nor predict-
able. This kind of test is useful for checking responses where data are divided into a limited 
number of classes. For example, a brokerage firm divides accounts into three classes only: class 
=1 active acco unt, =clas s2 inactive account , and =clas s3 closed account . If data are 
assigned to any other class through an error, the values are invalid. V alue checks are usually 
performed for discrete data, which are data that have only certain values. If there are many values, 
they are usually stored in a table of codes file. Having the values in a file provides an easy way 
to add or change values.
Cross-Reference Checks. Cross-reference checks are used when one element has a relationship 
with another one. To perform a cross-reference check, each field must be correct in itself. For 
example, the price for which an item is sold should be greater than the cost paid for the item. Price 
must be entered, numeric, and greater than zero. The same criterion is used to validate cost. When 
both price and cost are valid, they may be compared.
A geographical check is another type of cross-reference check. In the United States, the state 
abbreviation may be used to ensure that the first two digits of the zip code are valid for the state.
Test for Comparison with Stored Data. The next test for validity of input data that we consider 
is one comparing it with data that the computer has already stored. For example, a newly entered 
part number can be compared with the complete parts inventory to ensure that the number exists 
and is being entered correctly.
Setting up Self-Validating Codes (Check Digits). Another method for ensuring the accuracy of 
data, particularly identification numbers, is to use a check digit in the code itself. Suppose the 
part number 53411 needed to be typed into the system. While that is being entered, different types 
of errors can occur. One possible error is a miskeying a single digit: for example, the clerk types 
in 54411 instead of 53411. A second type of error is a transposed digit; it commonly occurs when 
the intended number 53411 gets typed in as number 54311 just because two keys are pressed in 
reverse order. Transposition errors are difficult for humans to detect.
The procedure for using a check digit involves beginning with an original numeric code, 
performing some mathematics to arrive at a derived check digit, and then adding the check digit 
to the original code. The mathematical process involves multiplying each of the digits in the 
original code by some predetermined weights, summing these results, and then dividing this sum 
by a modulus number. The modulus number is needed because the sum is usually a large number, 
and we need to reduce the result to a single digit. Finally, the remainder is subtracted from the 
modulus number, giving us the check digit. A well-known formula for check digits is the Luhn 
formula created in the 1960s. Credit card companies use it, as described next.
Verifying Credit Cards. When credit cards are entered into a website or a computer program, the 
first check is the length of the number. Credit card companies designed their cards to include a


===== BOOK PAGE 491 =====

CHAPTER 15  •  DEsIgnIng A CCuRATE  D ATA  EnTR y PR oCEDuREs     491
different number of digits. For example, Visa cards are 16 digits long, and American Express card 
numbers are 15 digits long.
Another test is to match the credit card company and bank to verify that it is indeed a card 
issued by that company. The first four digits usually signify the type of card. The middle digits 
usually represent the bank and the customer. The last digit is a check digit.
In addition to these verification methods, the Luhn formula can be used. Suppose we are 
given a number 7-7-7-8-8-8, where the first five numbers represent a bank account number, 
and the last digit is a check digit. Let’s apply the Luhn formula to see whether this is a valid 
number:
1. Double the second-last digit, then double every other digit (that is, skip a digit, double the 
next, skip a digit, double the next, etc.). For example, the number 7-7-7-8-8-8 becomes 
14-7-14-8-16-8.
2. If doubling any digit results in a number that is larger than 10, reduce this two-digit 
number to a single digit by adding the numbers together. In our example, the 14 becomes 
+=14 5 and the 16 becomes +=16 7. In doing so, our original number, 7-7-7-8-8-8, 
has been transformed into a new number, 5-7-5-8-7-8.
3. Now add all the digits in the new number together: ++ ++ +=57 58 78 40.
4. Look at the total. If it ends in zero, the number is valid according to the Luhn formula. The 
number 40 ends in zero, so we can say that it passes the Luhn formula test.
The Luhn formula can be used to identify mistakes in entering an incorrect credit card. For 
example, the credit card number 1334-1334-1334-1334 is assumed to be valid because the digits 
of the transformed number 2364-2364-2364-2364 add up to 60, a number ending in zero. If a user 
incorrectly enters a wrong digit, the total would not be a multiple of zero.
The Luhn formula does not catch every error, however. If a user makes mistakes in entering 
more than one digit, for example entering 1334-1334-1334-3314, the total of the transformed 
number, 2364-2364-2364-6324, is still 60. This transposition error (flipping the second-last and 
fourth-last digits) will not be caught.
Credit card companies also use the expiration date and a three- or four-digit verification code, 
often written on the reverse side of the card for more security.
The tests for checking on validity of input can go a long way toward protecting a system 
from the entry and storage of erroneous data. As a systems analyst, you should always assume 
that human errors in input are more likely than not to occur. It is your responsibility to understand 
which errors will invalidate data and how to use a computer to guard against those human errors 
and thus limit their intrusion into system data.
The Process of Validation
It is important to validate each field until it is either valid or an error has been detected. The order 
of testing data is to first check for missing data. Then a syntax test can check the length of the  
data entered and check for proper class and composition. Only after the syntax is correct are 
the semantics, or meaning, of the data validated. This includes a range, reasonable, or value test, 
followed by a check digit test.
GUI screens help reduce the number of human input errors when they incorporate radio 
buttons, check boxes, and drop-down lists. When radio buttons are used, one should be set as 
the default, and the only way it can be unchecked is if the user chooses a different radio button. 
In the case of drop-down lists, the first choice should contain a message informing the user to 
change the list. If the first choice is still selected when the form is submitted, a message should 
inform the user to select a different option.
Validating a single field is usually done with a series of IF . . . ELSE statements, but there 
are also pattern validation methods. These patterns can be found in the database design (as in 
Microsoft Access) but may be included in programming languages such as Perl, JavaScript, and 
XML schemas. The patterns are called regular expressions and contain symbols that represent the 
type of data that must be present in a field. Figure 15.18 illustrates characters used in JavaScript 
regular expressions.
Here is an example of pattern validation used to test an email address:
[A-Za-z0-9]\w{2,}@[A-Za-z0-9]{3,}\.[A-Za-z]{3}/


===== BOOK PAGE 492 =====

492    PART V  •  Qu ALITy  A ssuRAnCE AnD IMPLEMEnTATIon
The first letter must be any uppercase letter, lowercase letter, or number ([A-Za-z0-9]). This is 
followed by two or more characters that are any letter, number, or an underscore (\w{2,}). There 
must then be an @ symbol, followed by at least three letters or numbers, a period, and exactly 
three characters after the period.
A cross-reference check assumes that the validity of one field may depend on the value of 
another field. An example of a cross-reference check is checking for a valid date. In one very 
special case, the validity of the day of the month depends on the year: February 29 is valid only 
during leap years. Once single fields have been checked, cross-reference checks can be performed. 
Obviously, if one of the fields is incorrect, the cross-reference check is meaningless and should 
not be performed.
XML documents may be validated by comparing them to a document type definition (DTD) 
or a schema (refer to Chapter 8). The DTD will check to see whether the format of the document 
is valid, but a schema is much more powerful and will check the type of data, such as a short or 
long integer, a decimal number, or a date. A schema also checks a range of values, the number 
of digits to the left and right of a decimal point, and the values of codes. Free tools are available 
to validate a DTD or schema.
DATA ACCURACY ADVANTAGES IN  
ECOMMERCE ENVIRONMENTS
One of the many bonuses of ecommerce transactions is increased accuracy of data, due to four 
reasons:
1. Customers generally key or enter data themselves.
2. Data entered by customers are stored for later use.
3. Data entered at the point of sale are reused throughout the order fulfillment process.
4. Information is used as feedback to customers.
An analyst needs to be aware of the advantages that have resulted from ecommerce and the 
electronic capture and use of information.
FIGURE 15.18
These characters are used in 
regular expression (pattern) 
validation.
Character
Code
Meaning Used in Regular
Expression Validation
\d
\D
\w
\W
.
[characters]
[char-char]
[a–z][A–Z][0–9]
[^characters]
[^char-char]
[^a–z]
{n}
{n,}
\s
\S
Any digit 0–9
Any nondigit character
Any letter, number, or underscore
Any character other than a letter, number,
or underscore
Matches any character
Matches the characters in the brackets
Matches the range of characters
Will accept any letter or digit
Match anything other than the characters
Match anything outside the range of characters
Will accept anything except lowercase letters
Match exactly n occurrences of the preceding
character
Match at least n occurrences of the character
Any white space formatting character
(tab, new line, return, etc.)
Any nonwhite space character


===== BOOK PAGE 493 =====

CHAPTER 15  •  DEsIgnIng A CCuRATE  D ATA  EnTR y PR oCEDuREs     493
Customers Keying Their Own Data
First, customers know their own information better than anyone else. They know how to spell 
their street address, they know whether they live on a “Drive” or a “Street,” and they know their 
own area code. If this information is transmitted by phone, it is easier to make a mistake spelling 
the address. If users enter their own information, however, accuracy increases.
Storing Data for Later Use
After customers enter information at an ecommerce site, it may be stored on their own personal 
computers. Developers should use UX (user experience) design and should be especially attentive 
to creating a user experience that is functional and accurate for ecommerce transactions. If users 
visit ecommerce sites and fill out similar forms to complete a transaction, they will experience 
the advantage of storing this information. As they begin to type their name, drop-down lists will 
prompt them with their full name even though only a couple of characters were entered. By 
clicking on this prompt, the full name is entered, and no further typing is necessary for this field. 
This is called autocomplete or autosuggestion.
Companies that want to store information to enable faster and more accurate transactions 
do so in small files called cookies. Once information is stored in a cookie, a website can suggest 
matches for credit card and password information as well, and this information is encrypted so 
websites cannot read the information stored on the user’s computer. Personal information can only 
be accessed by the company that placed the cookie on the user’s computer.
Using Data through the Order Fulfillment Process
When companies capture information from a customer order, they can use and reuse that infor -
mation throughout the order fulfilment process. Hence, the information gathered to complete an 
order can be used to send an invoice to a customer, obtain the product from the warehouse, ship 
the product, send feedback to the customer, and restock the product by notifying the manufacturer. 
It can be used again to send a printed paper catalog to the customer or to send a special offer by 
email as well.
These ecommerce enhancements replace the traditional approach of using a paper-based 
procurement process with purchase orders sent via mail or fax. This electronic process not only 
speeds up the delivery of the product but also increases accuracy, ensuring the product is deliv-
ered to the correct address. Rather than reading a mailed-in form or fax, a shipper uses the more 
accurate electronic version of the data. Electronic information allows better supply-chain man-
agement, including checking product and resource availability electronically and automating 
planning, scheduling, and forecasting, and is required when setting up a blockchain to share and 
secure supply-chain information.
Providing Feedback to Customers
Confirmations and order status updates are ways to enhance feedback to customers. If a customer 
receives confirmation of a mistake in an order just placed, the order can be corrected immediately. 
For example, suppose a customer mistakenly submits an order for pairs of jeans from Amazon, 
but was only intending to purchase one. After submitting the order, the customer receives an 
email from Amazon confirming the order. The customer notices the mistake, immediately goes 
back online, and has the order corrected, thereby avoiding having to return the extra pair of jeans. 
Accuracy is improved by better feedback.
Summary
Ensuring the quality of the data input to an information system is critical to ensuring quality output. The 
quality of data entered can be improved through effective coding, effective and efficient data capture, and 
the validation of data.
Data entry by humans can be speeded up through effective use of coding, which puts data into 
short sequences of digits and letters. Both simple sequence codes and alphabetic derivation codes can be 
used to follow the progress of a given item. Classification codes and block sequence codes are useful for


===== BOOK PAGE 494 =====

494    PART V  •  Qu ALITy  A ssuRAnCE AnD IMPLEMEnTATIon
distinguishing classes of items from each other. Cipher codes are useful for concealing information that is 
sensitive or is restricted to employees.
Codes may be used to reveal information to users and to enable employees to locate items in stock and 
also make data entry more meaningful. Significant-digit subset codes use subgroups of digits to describe a 
product. Mnemonic codes reveal information by serving as human memory aids that can help a data-entry 
operator enter data correctly or help the user. The Unicode character set includes all standard language 
symbols. You can display web pages written in other alphabets by downloading an input method editor from 
Microsoft. Function codes are useful shortcuts for informing computers or people about what functions to 
perform or what actions to take.
Effective data entry should consider input devices. Creating a well-designed, effective form that serves 
as a source document is the first step. Data can be input through many different methods, each with varying 
speed and reliability. Keyboards have been redesigned for efficiency and improved ergonomics. Optical 
character recognition, magnetic ink character recognition, and mark-sense forms each have special capacities 
for improving efficiency. Bar codes speed data entry, improve data accuracy, and increase reliability. Quick 
response (QR) codes are becoming popular and efficient ways to direct users to information or to promotional 
websites. Many QR code scanner apps are available for smartphones, allowing users to interact easily with QR 
codes. RFID allows the automatic collection of data using RFID tags on products, people, or animals. They can 
improve inventory management and supply-chain processes and can support the use of blockchain technology.
Accurate data entry can be enhanced through the use of input validation. Analysts must work with users 
to design input validation tests to prevent erroneous data from being processed and stored, which is costly 
and potentially detrimental.
Input transactions should be checked to ensure the request is acceptable, authorized, and correct. Input 
data can be validated through software using several types of tests that check for missing data, length of data 
items, range and reasonableness of data, and invalid values for data. Input data can be compared with stored 
data for validation purposes. Once numerical data are input, they can be checked and corrected automatically 
through the use of check digits and the Luhn formula.
There is a set order for the testing of data to validate each field. There are also pattern validation methods 
found in the database design or included in programming languages. The patterns are called regular expres-
sions and contain symbols that represent the type of data that must be present in a field.
Ecommerce environments afford the opportunity for increasing accuracy of data. With proper emphasis 
on UX design, customers can enter their own data, store data for later use, use the same stored data through-
out the order fulfillment process, and receive feedback regarding order confirmations and updates.
Keywords and Phrases
alphabetic derivation code
autocomplete feature
bar code
block sequence code
bottleneck
changeable data
check digit
cipher code
classification code
coding
cookies
cross-reference check
differentiation data
function code
keyboarding
Luhn formula
magnetic ink character recognition (MICR)
mark-sense form
mnemonic code
near field communication (NFC)
optical character recognition (OCR)
quick response (QR) code
radio frequency identification (RFID)
regular expression
self-validating code
significant-digit subset code
simple sequence code
supply-chain management
test for class or composition
test for comparison with stored data
test for correct field length
test for invalid values
test for missing data
test for range or reasonableness
two-dimensional bar code
Unicode
validating input
Review Questions
1. What are the four primary objectives of data entry?
2. List the five general purposes for coding data.


===== BOOK PAGE 495 =====

CHAPTER 15  •  DEsIgnIng A CCuRATE  D ATA  EnTR y PR oCEDuREs     495
3. Define simple sequence code.
4. When is an alphabetic derivation code useful?
5. Explain what is accomplished with a classification code.
6. Define block sequence code.
7. What is the simplest type of code for concealing information?
8. What are the benefits of using a significant-digit subset code?
9. What is the purpose of using a mnemonic code for data?
10. Define function code.
11. List eight general guidelines for proper coding.
12. What are changeable data?
13. What are differentiation data?
14. What is one specific way to reduce the redundancy of data being entered?
15. Define the term bottleneck as it applies to data entry.
16. What three repetitive functions of data entry can be done more efficiently by a computer than by a 
data-entry operator?
17. List six data-entry methods.
18. List the three main problems that can occur with input transactions.
19. What is a QR code?
20. What are the main functions of two-dimensional bar codes?
21. List two ways developers can include QR codes in their designs.
22. Define RFID. What are the differences between active and passive RFID tags?
23. Give two examples of the use of RFID tags in process or inventory management in retail or health 
care environments.
24. What are eight tests for validating input data?
25. Which test checks to see whether data fields are correctly filled in with either numbers or letters?
26. What common error is missed by the Luhn formula test?
27. Which test would not permit a user to input a date such as October 32?
28. Which test ensures data accuracy by the incorporation of a number in the code itself?
29. List four improvements to data accuracy that transactions conducted over ecommerce websites can 
offer.
30. What is Unicode, and how is it used?
31. What is the process for validating data entered into fields?
32. What is a regular expression?
Problems
1. Savadove University, a small, highly selective private college specializing in graduate programs for 
the performing arts, needs to keep track of the list of students who (a) apply, (b) are accepted, and 
(c) actually enroll in master’s and doctoral programs at the university. For financial aid purposes, the 
university also must send a report to the federal student aid program to match with a list of students 
who receive loans but fail to register for a graduate program. Suggest a kind of code for this purpose 
and give an example of its use for Savadove University that demonstrates its appropriateness. What 
are its advantages?
2. The Central Pacific University Chipmunks college football team has been using a simple sequence 
code to keep track of season ticket holders and fans who attend games but who are not season ticket 
holders for all of its sports programs. There have been some upsetting mix-ups. In a paragraph, 
suggest a different coding scheme that will help uniquely identify each ticket holder and explain  
how it will prevent mix-ups.
3. A code used by an ice cream store to order its products is 12DRM215-220. This code is deciphered 
in this manner: 12 stands for the count of items in the box, DRM stands for Dreamcicles (a particular 
kind of ice cream novelty), and 215-220 indicates the entire class of low-fat products carried by the 
distributor.
a. What kind of code is used? Describe the purpose behind each part of the code (12, DRM, 
215-220).
b. Construct a coded entry using the same format and logic for an ice cream novelty called Pigeon 
Bars, which come in a six-count package and are not low-fat.
c. Construct a coded entry using the same format and logic for an ice cream novelty called Airwhips, 
which come in a 24-count package and are low-fat.
4. The data-entry operators at Melanie Julian Construction have been making errors when entering  
the codes for residential siding products, which are as follows: =Us tUcco , =AA luminum ,


===== BOOK PAGE 496 =====

496    PART V  •  Qu ALITy  A ssuRAnCE AnD IMPLEMEnTATIon
== =Rb Rick ,M Masonite ,E ZE Z color-lok enameled masonite, =NN atur al wood siding , 
=AI pAIntedf inis h, =SH SHak eS Hingles . Only one code per address is permitted.
a. List the possible problems with the coding system that could be contributing to erroneous entries. 
(Hint: Are the classes mutually exclusive?)
b. Devise a mnemonic code that will help the operators understand what they are entering and subse-
quently help their accuracy.
c. How would you redesign the classes for siding materials that have been classified into two classes, 
fireproof and fire resistant? Respond in a paragraph.
d. Some of the materials coded in Problem 4a above (natural wood siding, brick, shake shingles, and 
EZ color-lok enameled Masonite) are being used in innovative ways for scenic design for stage 
plays by some of the consultants for Melanie Julian Construction. Develop a code for the residen-
tial products you coded in Problem 4b above so consultants will recognize that they can be used 
on stage for scenic design as well.
5. The following is a code for one product in an extensive cosmetic line: L02002Z621289NA. L means 
that it is a lipstick, 0 means it was introduced without matching nail polish, 2002 is a sequence code 
indicating in what order it was produced, Z is a classification code indicating that the product is 
hypoallergenic, 621289 is the number of the plant (there are 15 plants) where the product is pro-
duced, and NA stands for “No Animal Testing of this Product.”
a. Critique the code by listing the features that might lead to inaccurate data entry.
b. Designer Brian d’Arcy James owns the cosmetic firm that uses this coding scheme. Always inter-
ested in new design, Brian is willing to look at a more elegant code that encodes the same infor-
mation in a better way. Redesign the coding scheme and provide a key for your work.
c. Write a sentence for each change you have suggested, indicating what data-entry problem (from 
Problem 5a) the change will eliminate.
d. Brian is delighted with your work. He says the firm would like to hire you to help branch out into 
selling theatrical makeup. (Shows such as Wicked and the fondly remembered Shrek with eight 
performances a week use a lot of green greasepaint.) Add any necessary new codes for the coding 
scheme you suggested in Problem 5b and provide a key for your work.
6. The d’Arcy James cosmetics firm requires its salespeople to use laptops to enter orders from retail 
department stores (their biggest customers). This information is then relayed to warehouses, and 
orders are shipped on a first-come, first-served basis. Unfortunately, the stores are aware of this 
policy and are extremely competitive about which one of them will offer a new d’Arcy James product 
first. Many retailers have taken the low road and persuaded salespeople to falsify their order dates on 
sales forms by making them earlier than they actually were.
a. This problem is creating havoc at the warehouse. Disciplining any of the personnel involved is 
not feasible. How can the warehouse computer be used to certify when orders are actually placed? 
Explain in a paragraph.
b. Salespeople are complaining that they have to ignore their true job of selling so that they can key 
in order data. List the data items relating to sales of cosmetics to retailers that should be stored in 
and retrieved from the central computer rather than keyed in for every order.
c. Describe in a paragraph or two how bar coding might help solve Problem 6b.
7. List the best data-entry method and your reason for choosing it for each of the following four situations:
a. Data retrieval allowed only if there is positive machine identification of the party requesting data.
b. Not enough trained personnel available to interpret long, written responses; many forms submitted 
that capture answers to multiple-choice examinations; high reliability necessary; fast turnaround 
not required.
c. A poison control center that maintains a large database of poisons and antidotes needs a way to 
enter data on the poison ingested; also enter weight, age, and general physical condition of the 
victim when a person calls the center’s toll-free number for emergency advice.
d. Download of a movie by a consumer with a credit card.
8. Ben Coleman, one of your systems analysis team members, surprises you by asserting that when a 
system uses a test for correct field length, it is redundant also to include a test for range or reason-
ableness. In a paragraph, give an example that demonstrates that Ben is mistaken on this one.
9. Several retailers have gotten together and begun issuing a “state” credit card that is good only in 
stores in their state. As a courtesy, salesclerks are permitted to transcribe the 15-digit account number 
by hand (after getting it from the accounting office) if the customer is not carrying the card. The only 
problem with accounts that retailers have noticed so far is that sometimes-erroneous account numbers 
are accepted into the computer system, resulting in a bill being issued to a nonexistent account.
a. What sort of validity test would clear up the problem? How? Respond in a paragraph.
b. Suggest an alternative data-entry method that might alleviate this problem altogether.
10. Provide an example of submitting the wrong data to a payroll system. Also state at what time in the 
input process this error should be flagged.


===== BOOK PAGE 497 =====

CHAPTER 15  •  DEsIgnIng A CCuRATE  D ATA  EnTR y PR oCEDuREs     497
11. Describe a good composition test for a program that accepts first and last names of users. What 
should the input be composed of? What input should it flag as unacceptable?
12. Recommend an appropriate range or reasonableness test for entering the birth date of a college 
student enrolling in a four-year college into the college registration system.
13. Explain how a test for comparison with stored data would work for a retailer that was adding new 
models of smartphones by manufacturers already represented in their database.
14. Define a regular expression for validating each of the following:
a. A U.S. zip code, which must have five digits, followed by an optional hyphen and four digits.
b. A telephone number in the format (aaa) nnn-nnnn, where aaa represents the area code and the ns 
represent digits.
c. A date in the form of day-month-year, where the month is a three-letter code, and the year is four 
digits. A hyphen must separate the day and month and year and month.
d. The alphabetic derivation code illustrated in this chapter for a magazine subscriber. The format is 
99999XXX9999XXX, where X represents a letter and 9 represents a number.
15. For the following codes, define the validation criteria (there may be multiple checks for each field) 
and the order in which you would test each of the conditions.
a. A credit card number entered on a web form: The customer has selected the type of credit card 
from a drop-down list.
b. A part number in a hardware store: The part number is a complex code, where the first digit 
represents the department (such as housewares, automotive, and so on), and the number should  
be self-checking. There are seven different departments.
c. The date that a book was postmarked when returned to an online bookstore: A copy of the 
customer receipt must be included with the book. Returned books must be postmarked within  
30 days of the purchase date.
d. A language spoken code used on a website: Hint: Search the web for standard language codes.
e. A driver’s license number, composed of several parts: The person’s birth month, the day of 
birth, and birth year, not necessarily together; a code representing eye color; and a sequence num-
ber. The driver’s license contains the date of birth, the eye and hair color, as well as the person’s 
name and address.
f. The Canadian postal code: The format is X9X 9X9 (X is any letter, 9 is any number).
g. Airport codes: Such as LAX for Los Angeles or DUB for Dublin.
h. A product key used to unlock purchased software: The key consists of four groups of five char-
acters each. The first group must have two letters followed by three numbers; the second group 
must contain two numbers followed by three letters; the third group must contain two letters, each 
from A through G, followed by three numbers from 1 through 4; and the last group must contain a 
letter, either an E, G, or C, two digits with values from 4 through 7, and two letters, either an A, B, 
or C. Hint: Using a pattern may be the best way to validate the product key.
Group Projects
1. Along with your group members, read Consulting Opportunity 15.3, “To Enter or Not to Enter: That 
Is the Question,” presented in this chapter. Design an appropriate data-entry system for Elsinore 
Industries. Your group’s design should emphasize efficiency and accuracy. In addition, distinguish 
between data that are changeable and data that differentiate an item being entered from all others. 
Draw prototypes of any screens necessary to explain what you are recommending.
2. Divide your group into analysts and Elsinore Industries employees to role-play. The analysts should 
present the new data-entry system, complete with prototype displays. Ask for feedback on the design 
from Elsinore employees.
3. Write a brief paragraph describing how to improve the original data-entry design based on the com-
ments received.
Selected Bibliography
Davis, G. B., & Olson, M. H. (1985). Management information systems: Conceptual foundations, struc-
ture, and development (2nd ed.). McGraw-Hill.
Gaith, A. (Ed.). (2018). RFID technolgy: Design, principles, applications and controversies. Nova 
Science.
How to validate credit card numbers with the Luhn algorithm in Java. (2020, December 24). https://keep-
growing.in/java/how-to-validate-credit-card-numbers-with-the-luhn-algorithm-in-java/


===== BOOK PAGE 498 =====

498    PART V  •  Qu ALITy  A ssuRAnCE AnD IMPLEMEnTATIon
Kendall, J. E. (2011). 2D or not 2D: That is the barcode question. Decision Line, 42(5), 14–16. 
https://decisionsciences.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/Oct.2011.DLv42n5.pdf
Lamming, M. G., Brown, P., Carter, K., Eldridge, M., Flynn, M., Louie, G., et al. (1994). The design of a 
human memory prosthesis. Computer Journal, 37, 153–163.
Lee, Y . M., Cheng, F., & Leung, Y . T. Exploring the impact of RFID on supply chain dynamics. In R. G. 
Ingalls, M. D. Rossetti, J. S. Smith, & B. A. Peters (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2004 Winter Simulation 
Conference, pp. 1145–1152.
MacKay, D. J. (2005). Information theory, inference and learning algorithms. Cambridge University 
Press.
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our capability for  
processing information. Psychological Review, 63(2), 81–97.
Newman, W. N., Lamming, M. G., & Lamming, M. (1995). Interactive system design. Addison-Wesley 
Longman.
Niederman, F., Mathieu, R. G., Morley, R., & Kwon, I. (2007). Examining RFID applications in supply 
chain management. Communications of the ACM, 50(7), 92–101.
Owsowitz, S., & Sweetland, A. (1965). Factors affecting coding errors (Rand Memorandum No.  
RM-4346-PR). Rand Corporation.
Robey, D., & Taggart, W. (1982). Human processing in information and decision support systems.  
MIS Quarterly, 6(2), 61–73.
Ryder, J. (n.d.). Credit card validation using LUHN formula. http://www.freevbcode.com/ShowCode.asp
?ID=3132


===== BOOK PAGE 499 =====

499
Quality Assurance  
and Implementation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Once you have mastered the material in this chapter, you will be able to:
  1 Recognize the importance of a total quality approach to improve the quality of software 
design and maintenance.
 2 Realize the importance of documentation and the variety of approaches to documentation.
 3 Understand why requirements traceability is useful.
 4 Acquire knowledge about testing, maintenance, and auditing.
 5 Understand how to implement distributed systems including service-oriented 
architecture and cloud computing.
 6 Learn how to design appropriate training programs for users of a new system.
 7 Recognize the differences among physical conversion strategies and be able to 
recommend one.
 8 Be able to address security, disaster preparedness, and disaster recovery concerns.
 9 Grasp the importance of evaluating a new system and be able to recommend a suitable 
evaluation technique.
10 Appreciate and evaluate corporate websites.
Quality has long been a concern of businesses, as it should be for systems analysts in the 
analysis and design of information systems. The user of an information system is the single 
most important factor in establishing and evaluating its quality. It is far less costly to correct 
problems in their early stages than it is to wait until a problem is articulated through user 
complaints or crises. The four approaches to quality assurance through software engineering 
are (1) securing total quality assurance by designing systems and software with a top-down, 
modular approach; (2) documenting software with appropriate tools; (3) using requirements 
traceability, and (4) testing, maintaining, and auditing software.
The process of ensuring that an information system is operational and then allowing 
users to take over its operation for use and evaluation is called implementation. Implemen-
tation concerns moving computer power to individual users by shifting computer power 
and responsibility to groups and individuals throughout the business with the help of 
distributed computing, cloud computing, and service-oriented architecture; training users 
and making sure that each user understands any new roles they must take on because of 
the new information system; choosing a conversion strategy; providing proper security, 
privacy, and disaster plans; and evaluating the new or modified information system.
16 
CHAPTER

