
===== BOOK PAGE 500 =====

500    PART V  •  QUALITY ASSURANCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
THE TOTAL QUALITY MANAGEMENT APPROACH
Total quality management (TQM) is essential throughout all the systems development steps. 
According to Evans and Lindsay (2015), the primary elements of TQM are meaningful only 
when they occur in an organizational context that supports a comprehensive quality effort. It is 
in this context that the elements of customer focus, strategic planning and leadership, continuous 
improvement, empowerment, and teamwork are united to change employees’ behavior and, ulti-
mately, the organization’s course. Notice that the concept of quality has broadened over the years 
to reflect an organizational rather than exclusively a production approach. Instead of conceiving 
of quality as controlling the number of defective products produced, quality is now thought of as 
an evolutionary process toward perfection, referred to as TQM.
Systems analysts must be aware of the factors that are driving the interest in quality. It is 
important to realize that the increasing commitment of businesses to TQM fits extraordinarily well 
into the overall objectives for systems analysis and design.
Six Sigma
The advent of Six Sigma has changed the approach to quality management. Systems analysts and 
systems users need to be aware of Six Sigma and apply some of the principles to their systems 
analysis projects. Originally developed by Motorola in the 1980s, Six Sigma is more than a 
methodology; it is a culture built on quality. The goal of Six Sigma is to eliminate all defects. 
This applies to any product, service, or process. In operations management textbooks from the 
1970s to the end of the twentieth century, quality control was expressed in terms of three stan-
dard deviations from the mean, or three sigma, which equals about 67,000 defects per 1 million 
opportunities. Six Sigma implies a goal of no more than 3.4 defects per 1 million opportunities.
Six Sigma is a top-down approach. It requires a CEO to adopt the philosophy and an executive 
to serve as project champion. Six Sigma can be summarized as a methodology. The steps of Six 
Sigma are shown in Figure 16.1. Six Sigma, however, is much more than a methodology; it is a 
philosophy and a culture. For more information on Six Sigma and quality management, visit the 
website for the Juran Center at the Carlson School of Management at the University of Minnesota, 
Twin Cities (https://carlsonschool.umn.edu/faculty-research/juran-research-center/about-us).  
In 2002 the Juran Center issued a proclamation to support and encourage quality. The authors of 
this book signed the charter at that time, and we agree wholeheartedly with its principles.
systems analyst serving as a project manager you can usefully 
frame managing remotely within a quality context. This is done 
to improve the quality of the remote project team’s relationships 
and deliverables. After you view the video, please reflect on the 
following questions:
1. What are some ways to build quality into managing project 
team members who are working remotely?
2. What can systems analysts do to improve the quality of their 
own personal skills for managing remotely?
3. How is quality assessment of outcomes different in face-to  
face-interactions with project teams versus managing 
remotely?
4. What parts of managing remotely are the most challenging 
for instilling quality practices? While your thoughts might 
first go to technology, what are additional communication 
issues that need attention when managing remotely?
SYSTEMS SCENARIO  
Instilling Quality into Working Remotely
This chapter frames systems development with a total quality 
approach to software design, documentation, and testing. In 
this video, the topic of putting quality into managing remotely 
is explored in a humorous way. As implied in the video, as a 
To view the video for this scenario, 
see eText Chapter 16.
Seven Dimensions/Boclips


===== BOOK PAGE 501 =====

CHAPTER 16  •  QUALITY  A SSURANCE  AND  IMPLEMENTATION      501
The late Dr. Joseph M. Juran (1964) said, “All quality improvement occurs on a project-by-
project basis and in no other way” (Section 5, p. 5.8). Systems analysts, project managers, and 
users should take that to heart.
Responsibility for Total Quality Management
Practically speaking, a large portion of the responsibility for the quality of information systems 
(IS) rests with systems users and management. Two things must happen for TQM to become a 
reality with systems projects. First, the full organizational support of management must exist, 
which is a departure from merely endorsing the newest management gimmick. Such support 
means establishing a context for management personnel to consider seriously how the quality of 
IS and information itself affects their work.
Early commitment to quality from analysts and business users is necessary to achieve the goal 
of quality. This commitment results in exerting an evenly paced effort toward quality throughout 
the systems development life cycle (SDLC), and it stands in stark contrast to having to pour huge 
amounts of effort into ironing out problems at the end of the project.
Organization support for quality in management information systems (MIS) can be achieved 
by providing on-the-job time for IS quality circles, which consist of six to eight organization 
peers specifically charged with considering both how to improve IS and how to implement 
improvements.
Through work in IS quality circles or through other mechanisms already in place, manage-
ment and users must develop guidelines for quality standards of IS. Preferably, standards will 
be reshaped every time a new system or major modification is to be formally proposed by the 
systems analysis team.
Hammering out quality standards is not easy, but it is possible and has been done. Part of 
a systems analyst’s job is to encourage users to crystallize their expectations about IS and their 
interactions with them.
Departmental quality standards must then be communicated through feedback to the systems 
analysis team. The team is often surprised at what has developed. Expectations typically are 
FIGURE 16.1
Every systems analyst should 
understand the methodology and 
philosophy of Six Sigma.
6
Standardize
the Changes
3
Analyze
the Causes
1
Deﬁne
the Problem
7
Draw
Conclusions
2
Observe
the Problem
Six Sigma
4
Act on
the Causes
5
Study
the Results


===== BOOK PAGE 502 =====

502    PART V  •  QUALITY ASSURANCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
less complex than what experienced analysts know can be done with a system. In addition, 
human issues that have been overlooked or underrated by the analysis team may be designated 
as extremely pressing in users’ quality standards. Getting users involved in spelling out quality 
standards for IS will help an analyst avoid expensive mistakes in unwanted or unnecessary  
systems development.
Structured Walkthrough
One of the strongest quality management actions a systems analysis team can take is to do 
structured walkthroughs routinely. Conducting structured walkthroughs is a way of using peer 
reviewers to monitor a system’s programming and overall development, point out problems, and 
allow the programmer or analyst who is responsible for that portion of the system to make suitable 
changes.
Structured walkthroughs involve at least four people: the person responsible for the part of 
the system or subsystem being reviewed (a programmer or analyst), a walkthrough coordinator, 
a programmer or analyst peer, and a peer who takes notes about suggestions.
Each person attending a walkthrough has a special role to play. The coordinator is there to 
ensure that the others adhere to any roles assigned to them and that any activities scheduled are 
accomplished. The programmer or analyst is there to listen, not to defend their thinking, rationalize 
a problem, or argue. The programmer or analyst peer is present to point out errors or potential 
problems, not to specify how the problems should be remedied. The notetaker records what is said 
so that the others present can interact without encumbrance.
Structured walkthroughs fit well in a TQM approach when performed throughout the SDLC. 
The time they take should be short—half an hour to an hour at most—which means they must be 
well coordinated. Figure 16.2 shows a form that is useful in organizing the structured walkthrough 
and reporting its results. Because walkthroughs take time, it is important not to overuse them.
You can use structured walkthroughs as a way to obtain (and then act on) valuable feed-
back from a perspective that you lack. As with all other quality assurance measures, the point of 
walkthroughs is to evaluate a product systematically on an ongoing basis rather than wait until 
completion of the system.
Top-Down Systems Design and Development
Many companies first introduced computer systems on the lowest level of the organization. 
This is where the immediate benefits to computerization are most observable and cost-effective. 
Businesses often take this approach to systems development by going out and acquiring, for 
example, commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) software for accounting, a different package for pro-
duction scheduling, and another one for marketing.
When in-house programming is done with a bottom-up approach, it is difficult to interface 
the subsystems so that they perform smoothly as a system. Interface bugs are enormously costly 
to correct, and many of them are not uncovered until programming is complete, when analysts 
are trying to meet a deadline in putting the system together. At this juncture, there is little time, 
budget, or user patience for the debugging of delicate interfaces that have been ignored.
Although each small subsystem appears to get the working software that it wants, when the 
overall system is considered, there are severe limitations to taking a bottom-up approach. One is 
that there is a duplication of effort in purchasing software and even in entering data. Another is that 
worthless data are entered into the system. A third, and perhaps the most serious, drawback of the 
bottom-up approach is that, although small clusters of users’ needs may have been met, overall 
organization objectives are not considered and hence cannot be met.
Top-down design allows a systems analyst to ascertain overall organization objectives first, 
as well as to ascertain how they are best met in an overall system. Then the analyst divides that 
system into subsystems and their requirements.
Top-down design is compatible with the general systems thinking that was discussed in 
Chapter 2. When systems analysts employ a top-down approach, they are thinking about the inter-
relationships and interdependencies of subsystems as they fit into the existing organization. The 
top-down approach also provides desirable emphasis on synergy, or the interfaces that systems 
and their subsystems require, which is lacking in the bottom-up approach. It helps to answer the 
question of how teams must work together to accomplish their goals.


===== BOOK PAGE 503 =====

CHAPTER 16  •  QUALITY  A SSURANCE  AND  IMPLEMENTATION      503
The advantages of using a top-down approach to systems design include avoiding the chaos 
of attempting to design a system all at once. As we have seen, planning and implementing MIS 
is incredibly complex. Attempting to get all subsystems in place and running at once is agreeing 
to fail.
A second advantage of taking a top-down approach to design is that it enables separate 
systems analysis teams to work in parallel on different but necessary subsystems, which can save 
a great deal of time. The use of teams for subsystems design is particularly well suited to a total 
quality assurance approach.
A third advantage is that a top-down approach avoids a major problem associated with a 
bottom-up approach. It prevents systems analysts from getting so mired in detail that they lose 
sight of what the system is supposed to do.
Total quality management and the top-down approach to design can go hand in hand. The top-
down approach provides the systems group with a ready-made division of users into task forces 
(specialized teams of users) for subsystems. Task forces set up in this manner can then serve a 
dual function as quality circles for the MIS. The necessary structure for quality assurance is then 
in place, as is proper motivation for getting the subsystem to accomplish the department goals 
that are important to the users involved.
FIGURE 16.2
A form to document structured 
walkthroughs; walkthroughs can 
be done whenever a portion of 
coding, a system, or a subsystem 
is complete.
Report to Management
on Structured Walkthrough
Project Name:  
Signature of Coordinator:
Date Report Is Filed:      /     /           
Project Number:
Date of Walkthrough:     /    /
Time:
Walkthrough Coordinator:
List of Participants:
Comments:
Action Recommended (Check One):
   (  )  ACCEPT WORK AS FOUND
   (  )  REVISE WORK
   (  )  REVISE WORK AND CONDUCT
     FOLLOW-UP WALKTHROUGH
   (  )  REJECT WORK
Portion (Description) of Work Examined:


===== BOOK PAGE 504 =====

504    PART V  •  QUALITY ASSURANCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
Using Structure Charts to Design Modular Systems
With the top-down design approach, the modular approach is useful in programming. This 
approach involves breaking the programming into logical, manageable portions, or modules. 
This kind of programming works well with top-down design because it emphasizes the interfaces 
between modules and does not neglect them until later in systems development. Ideally, each 
individual module should be functionally cohesive so that it is charged with accomplishing only 
one function.
Modular program design has three main advantages. First, modules are easier to write and 
debug because they are virtually self-contained. Tracing an error in a module is less complicated 
because a problem in one module should not cause problems in others.
A second advantage of modular design is that modules are easier to maintain. Modifications 
will usually be limited to a few modules and will not be spread over an entire program.
A third advantage of modular design is that modules are easier to grasp because they are 
self-contained subsystems. Hence, a reader can pick up a code listing of a module and understand 
its function.
Some guidelines for modular programming include the following:
1. Keep each module to a manageable size (ideally including only one function).
2. Pay particular attention to the critical interfaces (the data and control variables passed to 
other modules).
3. Minimize the number of modules the user must modify when making changes.
4. Maintain the hierarchical relationships set up in the top-down phases.
The recommended tool for designing a modular, top-down system is called a structure chart.  
A structure chart is simply a diagram consisting of rectangular boxes, which represent the modules, 
and connecting arrows.
Figure 16.3 shows a structure chart for changing a customer record, involving seven modules 
that are labeled 000, 100, 110, 120, and so on. Higher-level modules are numbered by 100s, and 
lower-level modules are numbered by 10s. This numbering allows programmers to insert modules 
it’s all together. All you’re doing is making waves. You’re acting as 
if they actually value our input. I wouldn’t give them the time of day, 
let alone do their work for them. They’re so smart, let them figure 
out what we need.”
Portia looks at Merle blankly, then starts getting a little 
angry. “We’ve been on the task force for four weeks,” she says. 
“You’ve sat in on four meetings. We’re the ones who know 
the business. The whole idea of TQM is to tell them what we 
need, what we’re satisfied with. If we don’t tell them what 
we need, then we can’t complain. I’m bringing it up the next 
time we meet.”
How effective do you think Merle will be in communicating her 
standards of quality to the systems analysis team and members of 
the IS task force? Respond in a paragraph. If systems analysts are 
able to perceive Merle’s unwillingness to work with the task force 
on developing quality standards, what would you say to convince 
her of the importance of user involvement in TQM? Make a list 
of arguments supporting the use of TQM. How can the systems 
analysis team respond to the concerns Portia is bringing up? In a 
paragraph, devise a response.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 16.1 
The Quality of MIS Is Not Strained
“Merle, come here and take a look at these end-of-the-week 
reports,” Portia pleads. As one of the managers on the six-person 
IS task force/quality assurance committee, Portia, who is from the 
marketing department, has been examining the system output that 
has been produced by the prototype. The systems analysis team has 
asked her to review the output.
Merle Chant walks over to Portia’s desk and takes a look at the pro-
spectus she’s holding. “Why, what’s wrong?” she asks. “It looks okay 
to me. I think you’re taking this task force deal too much to heart. We’re 
supposed to get our other work done as well, you know.” Merle turns 
to leave and returns to her desk slightly perturbed at being interrupted.
“Merle, have a little mercy. It is really silly to put up with these 
reports the way they are. I can’t find anything I need, and then I’m 
supposed to tell everyone else in the department what part of the 
report to read. I, for one, am disappointed. This report is slipshod. 
It doesn’t make any sense to me. It’s a rehash of the output we’re 
getting now. Actually, it looks worse. I am going to bring this up at 
the next task force meeting,” Portia proclaims insistently.
Merle turns to face her, saying, “Quality is their responsibility, 
Portia. If the system isn’t giving us good reports, they’ll fix it when


===== BOOK PAGE 505 =====

CHAPTER 16  •  QUALITY  A SSURANCE  AND  IMPLEMENTATION      505
using a number between the adjacent module numbers. For example, a module inserted between 
modules 110 and 120 would receive number 115.
Off to the sides of the connecting lines, two types of arrows are drawn. The arrows with the 
empty circles are called data couples, and the arrows with the filled-in circles are called control 
flags or switches. A switch is the same as a control flag except that it is limited to two values: 
either yes or no. These arrows indicate that something is passed either down to the lower module 
or up to the upper one.
Ideally, an analyst should keep this coupling to a minimum. The fewer data couples and 
control flags one has in the system, the easier it is to change it. When these modules are actually 
programmed, it is important to pass the least number of data couples between modules.
Even more important is that numerous control flags should be avoided. Control is designed to 
be passed from lower-level modules to those higher in the structure. On rare occasions, however, it 
will be necessary to pass control downward in the structure. When control is passed downward, a 
low-level module is allowed to make a decision, and the result is a module that performs two dif-
ferent tasks. This result violates the ideal of a functional module: it should perform only one task.
Even when a structure chart accomplishes all the purposes for which it was drawn, the struc-
ture chart cannot stand alone as the sole design and documentation technique. First, it doesn’t 
show the order in which the modules should be executed (a data flow diagram will accomplish 
that). Second, it doesn’t show enough detail (structured English will accomplish that).
An analyst who needs to complete a structured walkthrough might 
find it useful to take along the iPhone app Things. When the ana-
lyst returns to the office, they can upload the information to the 
desktop version. Using Things is just another way to get organized.  
The Things app allows the user to organize tasks into categories so 
that the user has a better understanding of the tasks. In the example 
in Figure 16.MAC, the user creates a walkthrough for a new release 
of the company website.
MAC APPEAL
FIGURE 16. MAC
Things for Mac by Cultured Code (http://culturedcode.com). (Screenshot from 
THINGS courtesy of Cultured Code GmbH & Co. KG. Reproduced with permission.)


===== BOOK PAGE 506 =====

506    PART V  •  QUALITY ASSURANCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
Service-Oriented Architecture
Modular development has led to the concept of service-oriented architecture (SOA), which is 
very different from the modules in the structure chart. Instead of being hierarchical as in the top-
down approach found in structure charts, the SOA approach is to make individual SOA services 
that are unassociated or only loosely coupled to one another.
Each service executes one action. One service may return the number of days in this month; 
another may tell us whether this is a leap year; a third service may reserve five nights in a hotel 
room from the end of February to the beginning of March. Although the third service needs 
to know the values obtained from the first and second services, they are independent of one 
another. Each service can be used in other applications within the organization or even in other 
organizations.
Service-oriented architecture is simply a group of services that can be called upon to provide 
specific functions. Rather than including calls to other services, a service can use certain defined 
protocols to communicate with other services.
Figure 16.4 shows how services are called upon throughout the system. Services can be general 
in nature and can be outsourced or even made available on the web. Other services are more spe-
cialized and oriented toward the business itself. These enterprise-based services provide business 
rules and differentiate one business from another. Services can be called on at a specific time and 
can be called on repeatedly in many application modules.
The burden of connecting services in a useful fashion, a process called orchestration, is 
placed on a systems designer. This can even be accomplished by selecting services from a menu 
of services and monitoring them by setting up an SOA dashboard.
To set up SOA, the services must be:
1. Modular
2. Reusable
3. Able to work together with other modules (interoperable)
4. Able to be categorized and identified
FIGURE 16.3
A structure chart encourages top-down design using modules.
000
Change
Customer
Master
100
Change
Customer
Record
130
Print Customer
Not Found
Error Line
140
Format New
Customer Master
150
Rewrite
Customer
Master
120
Read Customer
Master
110
Read Change
Customer
Transaction
Changed
Customer
Master
Changed
Customer
Master
Customer
Master
Customer
Master
Customer
Number
Customer
Number
Record
Found Switch
Change
Transaction
Record
End of
File
Switch
Change
Transaction
Record


===== BOOK PAGE 507 =====

CHAPTER 16  •  QUALITY  A SSURANCE  AND  IMPLEMENTATION      507
5. Able to be monitored
6. Compliant with industry-specific standards
The advantages of reusability and interoperability are obvious, but SOA is not without chal-
lenges. First, industry standards must be agreed upon. Next, a library must be maintained so 
developers can find the services they need. Finally, security and privacy can be issues when 
using software developed by someone else. Advocates of SOA claim that it has made many of 
the features found in Web 2.0 possible. Others have called cloud computing an offspring of SOA.
DOCUMENTATION APPROACHES
A total quality assurance effort requires that programs be documented properly. Software, 
systems, and formal and informal procedures need to be documented so that systems can be 
maintained and improved. Documentation allows users, programmers, and analysts to “see” the 
system and its software and procedures without having to interact with it.
Turnover of information service personnel has traditionally been high in comparison with 
other organizational departments, so chances are that the people who conceived of and installed 
the original system will not be the same ones who maintain it. Consistent, well-updated docu-
mentation will shorten the number of hours required for new people to learn the system before 
performing maintenance.
Systems and programs are undocumented or underdocumented for many reasons. Some of 
the problems reside with the systems and programs themselves, others with systems analysts and 
programmers.
Systems analysts may fail to document systems properly because they do not have the time 
or are not rewarded for time spent documenting. Some analysts do not document because they 
dread doing so or think it is not their real work. Furthermore, many analysts are reticent about 
documenting systems that are not their own, perhaps fearing reprisals if they include incorrect 
material about someone else’s system. Defenders of the SDLC approach remind us that documen-
tation accomplished by means of a computer-aided software engineering tool during the analysis 
phases can address many of these problems. In the agile approach, although it is a collaboration 
by the “product owners, designers, and developers,” it is ultimately the sofrtware creator who is 
responsible for documentation (Spies, 2021).
Procedure Manuals
Procedure manuals are common organizational documents that most people have seen. They are 
the English-language component of documentation, although they may also contain program 
codes, flowcharts, and so on. Manuals are intended to communicate to those who use them.  
FIGURE 16.4
Modules in service-oriented 
architecture are independent and 
can be ubiquitous.
Web-based Services
Enterprise-based Services
The Application Modules That Comprise a System


===== BOOK PAGE 508 =====

508    PART V  •  QUALITY ASSURANCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
They may contain background comments, steps required to accomplish different transactions, 
instructions on how to recover from problems, and what to do next if something isn’t working (trou-
bleshooting). Many manuals are now available online, with hypertext capability that facilitates use.
A straightforward, standardized approach to creating user support documentation is desirable. 
To be useful, user documentation must be kept up to date. Use of the web has revolutionized the 
speed with which assistance can be obtained by users. Many software developers have moved user 
support—complete with manuals, FAQ pages, online chat, and user communities—to the web.
Key sections of a manual should include an introduction, how to use the software, what to 
do if things go wrong, a technical reference section, an index, and information on how to contact 
the software or equipment manufacturer. The biggest complaints with procedure manuals are that 
(1) they are poorly organized, (2) it is hard to find needed information in them, (3) the specific 
case in question does not appear in the manual, and (4) the manual is not written in plain English.
The FOLKLORE Method
FOLKLORE is a systems documentation technique that was created to supplement some of 
the techniques just covered. Even with the plethora of techniques available, many systems are 
inadequately documented or not documented at all. FOLKLORE gathers information that is often 
shared among users but is seldom written down.
FOLKLORE was first developed in the 1980s by Kendall and Losee (1986), well before the 
creation of blogs and user communities. FOLKLORE has two main advantages over commonly 
found user communities: (1) it is structured, resulting in more organized and more complete 
documentation, and (2) it encourages someone familiar with the software to seek out information 
rather than depend on users to come forth on their own.
FOLKLORE is a systematic technique, based on traditional methods used in gathering folk-
lore about people and legends. This approach to systems documentation requires an analyst to 
interview users, investigate existing documentation in files, and observe the processing of informa-
tion. The objective is to gather information corresponding to one of four categories: customs, tales, 
sayings, and art forms. Figure 16.5 suggests how each category relates to the documentation of IS.
When documenting customs, an analyst (or other folklorist) tries to capture in writing what 
users are currently doing to get all programs to run without problems. An example of a custom is: 
“Usually, we take two days to update the monthly records because the task is quite large. We run 
commercial accounts on day one and save the others for the next day.”
Tales are stories that users tell regarding how the system worked. The usefulness of the tale, 
of course, depends on the user’s memory and is at best an opinion about how the program worked. 
As we saw in Chapter 4, stories typically have a beginning, a middle, and an end. So, we would 
have a story about a problem (the beginning), a description of the effects (the middle), and the 
solution (the end). Stories often have a hero (also called the protagonist) who is likely the teller 
of the tale.
Sayings are brief statements representing generalizations or advice. We have many sayings 
in everyday life. In the United States we say, “April showers bring May flowers” or “A stitch in 
FIGURE 16.5
Customs, tales, sayings, and art 
forms used in the FOLKLORE 
method of documentation apply 
to IS.
CUSTOMS
Descriptions of how
users currently get
the system to run.
FOLKLORE
TALES
Stories about how
users were able to get
the system to work.
ART FORMS
Diagrams, tables,
and ﬂowcharts.
SAYINGS
“Do this and it works.”


===== BOOK PAGE 509 =====

CHAPTER 16  •  QUALITY  A SSURANCE  AND  IMPLEMENTATION      509
time saves nine.” In systems documentation, we have many sayings, such as “Omit this section 
of code, and the program will bomb” or “Always back up frequently.” Users like to give advice, 
and an analyst should try to capture this advice and include it in FOLKLORE documentation. 
User stories that were gleaned in interviewing during the analysis portion of the project may still 
be relevant here.
Gathering art forms is another important activity of traditional folklorists, and a systems 
analyst should understand its importance too. Flowcharts, diagrams, and tables that users draw 
sometimes may be better or more useful than flowcharts drawn by the original system author. 
Analysts will often find such art posted on bulletin boards, or they may ask the users to clean out 
their files and retrieve any useful diagrams.
Contributors to a FOLKLORE document do not have to document the entire system, only 
the parts they know about. Just like with web-based support communities, the danger of relying 
on FOLKLORE is that the information gathered from users may be correct, partially correct, 
or incorrect.
Choosing a Design and Documentation Technique
The techniques discussed in this chapter are extremely valuable as design tools, memory aids, 
productivity tools, and as a means of reducing dependencies on key staff members. A systems 
analyst, however, is faced with a difficult decision regarding which method to adopt. The following 
is a set of guidelines to help an analyst use the appropriate technique. A systems analyst should 
choose a technique that:
1. Is compatible with existing documentation.
2. Is understood by others in the organization (or is easily taught to others).
3. Allows you to return to working on the system after you have been away from it for a 
period of time.
4. Is suitable for the size of the system on which you are working.
5. Allows for a structured design approach if that is considered to be more important than 
other factors.
6. Allows for easy modification.
Dhara Gunseyin, a senior advertising executive, seems slightly 
upset, stating, “I learned about flowcharting from the first systems 
analysts we had years ago. Don’t you people do that anymore?  
I think they work best.”
What was at first a friendly meeting suddenly seems to 
have reached an impasse. The participants are looking at each 
other warily. As a systems analyst who has worked on many 
different projects with many different kinds of people, you real -
ize that the group is looking to you to make some reasonable 
suggestions.
Based on what you know about the various documentation 
techniques, what technique(s) would you propose to the members 
of the group? How will the technique(s) you propose overcome 
some of the concerns they have voiced? What process will you 
use to decide on appropriate techniques? Compose your answer 
in one page.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 16.2 
Write Is Right
“It’s so easy to understand. I say if everybody uses pseudo-code, 
we won’t have trouble, you know, with things not being standard-
ized,” says Al Gorithm, a new computer programmer who will be 
working with your systems analysis team. Al is speaking at an infor-
mal meeting among three members of the team, a six-person MIS 
task force from the advertising department, and two programmers, 
who were all working to develop an IS for advertising personnel.
Zola Aro, an advertising account executive and one of the 
members of the MIS task force, looks up in surprise. “What is this 
method called?” The two programmers reply at the same time: 
“Pseudo-code.” Zola looks unimpressed and says, “That doesn’t 
say anything to me.”
Neeva Phail, one of the systems analysts, begins explaining: 
“It probably won’t matter one way or the other what we use, if—”
Flo Chart, another systems analyst, breaks in saying, “I hate 
pseudo-code.” She looks hopefully at the computer programmers. 
“I’m sure we can agree on a better technique.”


===== BOOK PAGE 510 =====

510    PART V  •  QUALITY ASSURANCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
REQUIREMENTS TRACEABILITY
Related to both documentation (discussed in the previous section) and testing (discussed in the 
following section) is requirements traceability. Traceability has been accomplished by manually 
keeping track of requirements in a traceability matrix that can be maintained in Microsoft Excel. It 
complements other documentation techniques that are part of the SDLC. Agile methods are now 
keeping track of requirements using traceabilty software such as Jama Software, which interface 
with other apps to produce an automated traceability matrix and exception report (Weigers, 2022). 
Still, accurate traceability remains a challenge (Kannenberg & Saiedian, 2009).
Requirements traceability follows the life of a requirement in both directions. Ideally, a 
requirement can be traced back to a business objective and forward to a successfully deployed 
product. It may seem that keeping track of the linkages and relationships of the system is difficult 
but getting organized early can prevent problems and save time later on in the project.
Traceability can be forward and backward, but since they either come to or from require-
ments, there are really four types, as shown in Figure 16.6.
1. Forward TO requirements traceability originates from customer needs and proceeds to 
requirements. Since customer needs change over time, forward traceability allows the ana-
lyst to follow the path to the requirement so it can be changed as well.
2. Forward FROM traceability starts with the requirements and follows what happens down-
stream to things like test cases. This is because when a requirement changes, it needs to be 
tested and verified.
3. Backward FROM requirements traceability is needed to explain the purpose of the 
requirement. It is linked to the use case that explains how the requirement originated.
4. Backward TO requirements traceability begins at the work performed and traces the work 
back to the requirement. It allows an analyst to see the performed work and determine 
which requirements had part of the work. If the work wasn’t complete, the analyst would 
be able to locate anything that was missing in the requirement.
Knowing forward and backward traceability, the systems analyst can diagram the system 
and also create a traceability matrix, which can be used as a checklist as well as documentation 
for the system.
FIGURE 16.6
Traceability involves four different 
opportunities
Forward FROM Requirements
Requirement Test Cases
Backwards TO Requirements
Requirement Performed Work
Forward TO Requirements
RequirementCustomer
Needs
Backwards FROM Requirements
RequirementUser Cases


===== BOOK PAGE 511 =====

CHAPTER 16  •  QUALITY  A SSURANCE  AND  IMPLEMENTATION      511
Figure 16.7 is an example of a traceability matrix. Because there are so many requirements, 
test cases, and responsible people, a matrix in table form works better than diagrams. Here each 
requirement is traceable to its business objective, test cases, and performed work.
Jama Software is currently the dominant company that manages traceability. In addition to 
having a set of tools to document, diagram, and create traceability matrices, Jama can integrate 
with other major tools in the software industry. One of these tools is Jira software, mentioned 
earlier in the book. This interchange allows live traceability and efficiency. Jama also extends 
functionality by producing dashboards like the one pictured in Figure 16.8. This dashboard 
manages traceability exceptions.
Planning for traceability has some advantages:
1. It ensures that the final product is linked with an original business objective and customer 
needs, test cases, use cases, and performed work.
2. It saves time and money if there is an issue since the links have already been created. It is 
always more difficult to figure out the relationships after the work is done.
3. If a customer wants to change a feature, the links and relationships tell which requirements 
need to be changed to achieve the customer’s wishes.
4. If the performed work is not up to expectations, the analyst can easily determine which 
requirement can be changed.
FIGURE 16.7
An example of a traceability 
matrix.
B#
1
R#
R1
R2
Requirement
Customer wants to sign on
Customer wants to pay
TC#
TC1
TC2
TC3
TC4
TC5
TC6
TC7
Test Case Description
With ID and password
With ID, wrong password
With wrong ID
By Credit Card
By Debit Card
By Apple Pay
By Gift Card
Person Responsible
Adya
Adya
Adya
Sadoughi
Sadoughi
Niederman
Sadoughi
Status
In Process
In Process
In Process
Done
Done
Done
Done
FIGURE 16.8
A traceability exception dashboard from Jama. Courtesy: Jama Software


===== BOOK PAGE 512 =====

512    PART V  •  QUALITY ASSURANCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
TESTING, MAINTENANCE, AND AUDITING
Once an analyst has designed and coded the system, testing, maintenance, and auditing of it are 
prime considerations.
The Testing Process
All of a system’s newly written or modified application programs—as well as new procedure 
manuals, new hardware, and all system interfaces—must be tested thoroughly. Haphazard, trial-
and-error testing will not suffice. Testing is done throughout systems development, not just at the 
end. It is meant to turn up previously unknown problems, not to demonstrate the perfection of 
programs, manuals, or equipment.
Although testing is tedious, it is an essential series of steps that helps ensure the quality of the 
eventual system. It is far less disruptive to test beforehand than to have a poorly tested system fail 
after installation. Testing is accomplished on subsystems or program modules as work progresses. 
Testing is done on many different levels at various intervals. Before a system is put into produc-
tion, all programs must be desk checked, checked with test data, and checked to see whether the 
modules work together with one another as planned.
A system as a working whole must also be tested. Included here are testing the interfaces 
between subsystems, the correctness of output, and the usefulness and understandability of 
systems documentation and output. Programmers, analysts, operators, and users all play different 
roles in the various aspects of testing, as shown in Figure 16.9. Testing of hardware is typically 
provided as a service by vendors of equipment, who will run their own tests on equipment when 
it is delivered on-site.
Program Testing with Test Data. Much of the responsibility for program testing resides with 
the original author(s) of each program. A systems analyst serves as an advisor and coordinator 
for program testing. In this capacity, an analyst works to ensure that correct testing techniques are 
implemented by programmers but probably does not personally carry out this level of checking.
At this stage, computer programmers must first desk-check their programs to verify the way 
the system will work. In desk checking, the coder follows each step in the program on paper to 
check whether the routine works as it is written.
Next, computer programmers must create both valid and invalid test data. These data are then 
run to see whether base routines work and also to catch errors. If output from main modules is 
satisfactory, you can add more test data and check other modules. Created test data should test 
possible minimum and maximum values as well as all possible variations in format and codes. File 
output from test data must be carefully verified. It should never be assumed that data contained 
in a file are correct just because a file was created and accessed.
FIGURE 16.9
Programmers, analysts, operators, 
and users all play different roles in 
testing software and systems.
TESTING
Full Systems
Testing with
Live Data
USERS
ANALYSTS
Link Testing
with Test Data
Program Testing
with Test Data
Full Systems
Testing with
Test Data
OPERATORS
PROGRAMMERS


===== BOOK PAGE 513 =====

CHAPTER 16  •  QUALITY  A SSURANCE  AND  IMPLEMENTATION      513
Throughout this process, a systems analyst checks output for errors, advising the computer 
programmer of any needed corrections. An analyst will usually not recommend or create test data 
for program testing but might point out to the computer programmer omissions of data types to 
be added in later tests.
Link Testing with Test Data. When programs pass desk checking and checking with test data, 
they must go through link testing, which is also referred to as string testing. Link testing checks 
to see whether programs that are interdependent work together as planned.
An analyst creates special test data that cover a variety of processing situations for link testing. 
First, typical test data are processed to see if the system can handle normal transactions, those that 
would make up the bulk of its load. If the system works with normal transactions, variations are 
added, including invalid data used to ensure that the system can properly detect errors.
Full Systems Testing with Test Data. When link tests are satisfactorily concluded, a system as a 
complete entity must be tested. At this stage, operators and end users become actively involved in 
testing. Test data, created by the systems analysis team for the express purpose of testing system 
objectives, are used.
As can be expected, a number of factors must be considered when systems testing with 
test data:
1. Examine whether operators have adequate documentation in procedure manuals (hard copy 
or online) to afford correct and efficient operation.
2. Check whether procedure manuals are clear enough in communicating how data should be 
prepared for input.
3. Ascertain whether workflows necessitated by the new or modified system actually “flow.”
4. Determine whether output is correct and whether users understand that this output is, in all 
likelihood, as it will look in its final form.
Remember to schedule adequate time for systems testing. Unfortunately, this step is often dropped 
if system installation is lagging behind the target date.
Systems testing includes reaffirming the quality standards for system performance that were 
set up when the initial system specifications were written. Everyone involved should once again 
agree on how to determine whether the system is doing what it is supposed to do. This step will 
include measures of error, timeliness, ease of use, proper ordering of transactions, acceptable 
downtime, and understandable procedure manuals.
Full Systems Testing with Live Data. When systems tests using test data prove satisfactory, it is 
a good idea to try the new system with several passes on what is called live data, data that have 
been successfully processed through the existing system. This step allows an accurate comparison 
of the new system’s output with what you know to be correctly processed output, as well as a good 
idea for testing how actual data will be handled. Obviously, this step is not possible when creating 
entirely new outputs (for instance, output from an ecommerce transaction from a new corporate 
website). As with test data, only small amounts of live data are used in this kind of system testing.
Although much thought is given to user–system interaction (see Chapter 14), you can never 
fully predict the wide range of differences in the way users will interact with a system. It is not 
enough to interview users about how they are interacting with the system; you must observe them 
firsthand.
Items to watch for are ease of learning the system and user reaction to system feedback, 
including what happens when an error message is received and when the user is informed that 
the system is executing their commands. Be particularly sensitive to how users react to system 
response time and to the language of responses. Also, listen to what users say about the system as 
they encounter it. Any real problems need to be addressed before the system is put into production, 
not just glossed over as adjustments to the system that users and operators ought to make on  
their own.
Procedure manuals, just like computer software, also need to be tested. Although manuals can 
be proofread by support staff and checked for technical accuracy by the systems analysis team, the 
only real way to test them is to have users and operators try them, preferably during full systems 
testing with live data. Consider user suggestions and incorporate them into the final versions of 
web pages, printed manuals, Read Me files, and other documentation.


===== BOOK PAGE 514 =====

514    PART V  •  QUALITY ASSURANCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
Behavior-Driven Development
Behavior-driven development (BDD) is a method that develops software by putting features to 
the test and determining which features succeed, which features fail, and which features may be 
missing. Developers will initially write failing unit tests. Then they will write and rewrite code 
until the code passes.
Behavior-driven development consists of both unit testing and acceptance testing. Unit testing, 
a type of testing that ensures that each unit of software performs properly, involves writing code to 
test functions and features in software. Acceptance testing is usually done by business customers 
and acceptance criteria is best written as a user story. A user story can be collaborative, taking into 
consideration the developer and the customer. A user story can start with the following: “I am a 
customer. I would like {this feature}, so it can help me with {a decision}.” Both the developers 
and customers can be involved. In addition to unit and acceptance testing, BDD asks the question, 
Does the system exhibit the behavior desired?
The British Broadcasting Corporation maintains an open source application called ShouldIT. 
This application allows a developer to write tests in any framework in any language and it will 
inform the developer which features passed, which failed, and, through visualization, make the 
developer realize whether a feature is missing. It can be found on GitHub.
Behavior-driven development has some advantages as well as disadvantages. Advantages 
include:
• It might speed up testing.
• Debugging processes are usually easier.
• Costs of fixing a problem are less than maintenance later on.
• There is added confidence that the software will function properly.
Stan contemplates the chart momentarily, and then states, 
“Something’s got to go. Let’s see here . . . maybe move testing of 
the accounting module to—”
Lou interrupts, saying bluntly, “Nope, already thought of 
that, both Santina Stanford and Jacqueline Binet from accounting 
are out of town in August. Maybe we can skip that portion of 
the testing. They’ve been really cooperative. I don’t think they’d 
object if we just ‘do it for real’ and test as we actually go into 
production.”
“I think that’s a good idea, Lou,” Stan agrees, trying to make 
up for his earlier jokes. “We haven’t had any real trouble with 
that, and the computer programmers sure are confident. That way 
we could stay on schedule with everything else. I vote for not  
testing the accounting portion, but just sort of winging it when 
it starts up.”
As the most senior member of the team present, what can you 
do to convince Lou and Stan about the importance of testing the 
accounting module with live data? What can systems analysts do in 
planning their time to allow adequate time for testing with test and 
live data? What are some of the possible problems the team mem-
bers may encounter if they do not test the system completely with 
live data before putting the system into production? Realistically, 
are there steps in the systems analysis and design process that can 
be collapsed to bring a delayed project in on time? Respond to these 
questions in two double-spaced pages.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 16.3 
Cramming for Your Systems Test
“We’re strapped for time. Just look at this projection,” says 
Lou Scuntroll, the newest member of your systems analysis team, 
showing you the PERT diagram that the team has been using to 
project when the new system would be up and running. “We can’t 
possibly make the July target date for testing with live data. We’re 
running three weeks behind because of that slow equipment ship-
ment. It was supposed to be here from Guadalajara by now.”
As one of the systems analysts who has seen deadlines come 
and go on other projects, you try to remain calm and to size up 
the situation carefully before you speak. Slowly, you question Lou 
about the possibility of delaying testing.
Lou replies, “If we try to push the testing off until the first 
weeks of August, two key people from accounting are going to be 
out on vacation.” Lou is visibly upset at the possibility of missing 
the deadline.
Stan Dards, another junior member of your systems analysis 
team, enters Lou’s office. “You two look terrible. Things are going 
okay, aren’t they? I’m not reassigned to program a payroll applica-
tion again, am I?”
Lou looks up, obviously neither appreciating Stan’s sense of 
humor nor what seems like his single-minded self-concern. “Good 
thing you came in when you did. We’ve got some big decisions to 
make about scheduling.” Lou holds up the PERT diagram for Stan’s 
inspection. “Notice the July test date. Notice that there is no way we 
can make it. Any bright ideas?”


===== BOOK PAGE 515 =====

CHAPTER 16  •  QUALITY  A SSURANCE  AND  IMPLEMENTATION      515
While disadvantages include:
• BDD tests only test sets of data and their functionality, not the entire system in use.
• Since testing involves writing more code (that will later be removed) in order to test the 
software, it can add complexity.
• Tests will not identify every bug.
• Developers should not assume that systems are documented sufficiently if they rely solely 
on BDD testing outcomes and descriptions.
Maintenance Practices
Your objective as a systems analyst should be to install or modify systems that have a reasonably 
useful life. You want to create a system whose design is comprehensive and farsighted enough to 
serve current and projected user needs for several years to come. Part of your expertise should 
be used to project what those needs might be and then build flexibility and adaptability into 
the system. The better the system design, the easier it will be to maintain and the less money the 
business will have to spend on maintenance.
Reducing maintenance costs is a major concern, and software maintenance alone can devour 
upward of 50 percent of the total data processing budget for a business. Excessive maintenance 
costs reflect directly back on the system’s designer; approximately 70 percent of software errors 
have been attributed to inappropriate software design. From a systems perspective, it makes sense 
that detecting and correcting software design errors early on is less costly than letting errors 
remain unnoticed until maintenance is necessary.
Maintenance is performed most often to improve the existing software rather than to respond 
to a crisis or a system failure. Maintenance is also done to update software in response to the 
changing organization. This work is not as substantial as enhancing the software, but it must be 
done. Emergency and adaptive maintenance comprises less than half of all systems maintenance.
Part of a systems analyst’s job is to ensure that there are adequate channels and procedures 
in place to permit feedback about—and subsequent response to—maintenance needs. Users must 
be able to communicate problems and suggestions easily to those who will be maintaining the 
system. Solutions are to provide users email access to technical support and to give them proper 
authorization to download product updates or patches from the Web.
Auditing
Auditing is yet another way of ensuring the quality of the information contained in a system. 
Broadly defined, auditing refers to having an expert (who is not involved in setting up or using 
a system) examine information to ascertain its reliability. Whether or not information is found to 
be reliable, the finding on its reliability is communicated to others for the purpose of making the 
system’s information more useful to them.
For IS, there are generally two kinds of auditors: internal and external. Whether both are 
necessary for the system you design depends on what kind of system it is. Internal auditors work 
for the same organization that owns the IS, whereas external (also called independent) auditors 
are hired from the outside.
External auditors are used when the IS processes data that influences a company’s financial 
statements. External auditors audit the system to ensure the fairness of the financial statements being 
produced. They also may be brought in if something out of the ordinary is occurring that involves 
company employees, such as suspected computer fraud or embezzlement of corporate funds.
Internal auditors study the controls used in the IS to make sure they are adequate and are 
doing what they are purported to be doing. They also test the adequacy of security controls. 
Although they work for the same organization, internal auditors do not report to the people 
responsible for the system they are auditing. The work of internal auditors is often more in-depth 
than that of external auditors.
IMPLEMENTING DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS
If the reliability of a telecommunications network is high, it is possible to have distributed systems 
for businesses, a setup that can be conceived of as an application of telecommunications. The 
concept of distributed systems is used in many different ways. Here it will be taken in a broad


===== BOOK PAGE 516 =====

516    PART V  •  QUALITY ASSURANCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
sense, including workstations that can communicate with each other and data processors, as well 
as different hierarchical architectural configurations of data processors that communicate with 
each other and that have differing data storage capabilities.
In this model, the processing functions are delegated either to clients (users) or to servers, 
depending on which machines are most suitable for executing the work. In this type of architecture, 
the client portion of a network application will run on the client system, with the server part of the 
application running on the file server. With a client/server model, users interact with limited parts 
of the application, including the user interface, data input, database queries, and report generation. 
Controlling user access to centralized databases, retrieving or processing data, and other functions 
(such as managing peripheral devices) are handled by the server.
Client/Server Technology
The client/server model, client/server computing, client/server technology, and client/server 
architecture all refer to a design model that can be thought of as applications running on a network. 
In very basic terms, you can picture the client requesting—and the server executing or in some 
way fulfilling—the request. This would be considered two-tiered client/server architecture.
A more involved configuration uses three sets of computers to accomplish retrieval, 
processing, storage, and receiving of data. Figure 16.10 shows a three-tiered client/server model. 
FIGURE 16.10
A three-tiered client/server configuration.
Web Server
(handles web-based
exchange of information)
Client Computers
(the means of input and
display of information)
Application Server
(processes data to and from
the client computers and the
database Server)
Database Server
(stores and
retrieves data)


===== BOOK PAGE 517 =====

CHAPTER 16  •  QUALITY  A SSURANCE  AND  IMPLEMENTATION      517
In this figure, client computers access three different tiers of servers: web servers, which handle 
web-based exchange of information; application servers, which process data to and from the client 
computers and the database server; and the database server, which stores and receives data. The 
computers on the network are programmed to perform work efficiently by dividing up processing 
tasks among clients and servers.
When you think of the client/server model, you should think of a system that accentuates 
the users as the center of the work, with their interaction with data as the key concept. Although 
there are two elements working—the client and the server—it is the intent of the client/server 
model that users view it as one system. Indeed, the hope is that users are unaware of how the 
client/server network is performing its distributed processing; it should have the look and feel of a 
unified system. In a peer-to-peer network, PCs can act as either the server or the client, depending 
on the requirements of the application.
Clients as Part of the Client/Server Model. When you see the term client, you might be tempted 
to think of people or users; for example, we speak of “clients of our consulting practice.” In the 
client/server model, however, the term client refers not to people but to networked machines that 
are typical points of entry to the client/server system that is used by humans. Therefore, clients 
could be networked desktop computers, a workstation, notebook computers, or any other way in 
which the user can enter the system.
Using a graphical user interface, individuals typically interface directly only with the client 
part. Client workstations use smaller programs that reside in the client to do front-end processing 
(as opposed to the back-end processing mentioned later), including communicating with the user. 
If an application is called a client-based application, the application resides in a client computer 
and cannot be accessed by other users on the network.
Weighing the Advantages and Disadvantages of the Client/Server Model. Early adopters of the 
client/server model found that this model was not always the best solution to an organization’s 
computing problems. Often, the systems designer is asked to endorse a client/server model that is 
already in the works. Just as with any other corporate computing proposal that you did not have 
an active part in creating, you must review the plan carefully. Will the organization’s culture sup-
port a client/server model? What kinds of changes must be made in the informal culture and in 
the formal work procedures before a client/server model can be used to its full potential? What 
should your role as a systems analyst be in this situation?
Although lower processing costs are cited as a benefit of the client/server model, there is 
very little actual data available to prove it (even though there is some anecdotal evidence to sup-
port this claim). There are well-documented high start-up or switch-over costs associated with a 
movement to a client/server architecture. Applications for the client/server model must be written 
as two separate software components, each running on separate machines, but they must appear as 
if they are operating as one application. Using the client/server model, however, affords greater 
computer power and greater opportunity to customize applications than other options.
Although networks can be characterized by their shape or topology, they are also discussed in 
terms of their geographic coverage and the kinds of services they offer. Standard types of networks 
include a wide area network (W AN) and a local area network (LAN). LANs are standard for 
linking local computers or terminals within a department, building, or several buildings of an 
organization. WANs can serve users over several miles or across entire continents.
Networking is now technically, economically, and operationally feasible for small offices as 
well, and it provides a solution that analysts must consider for small businesses. One of the costly 
aspects of implementing a LAN is that each time it is moved, it must be rewired. Some organi-
zations are coping with this by setting up a high-speed, wireless local area network (WLAN). 
More specifically, these wireless networks are called Wi-Fi.
Network Modeling
Because networking has become so important, a systems designer needs to consider network design. 
Whether a systems designer is involved with decisions about the configurations of networks or 
worries about hardware, such as routers and bridges that must be in place when networks meet, 
the systems designer must always consider the logical design of networks.
An analyst should adopt a set of symbols such as the ones in Figure 16.11 to model a 
network. It is useful to have distinct symbols to distinguish among hubs, external networks, and


===== BOOK PAGE 518 =====

518    PART V  •  QUALITY ASSURANCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
workstations (PCs, laptops, and so on). It is also useful to adopt a convention for illustrating 
multiple networks and workstations. The first step is to draw a network decomposition diagram 
that provides an overview of the system. Next, draw a hub connectivity diagram. Finally, explode 
the hub connectivity diagram to show the various workstations and how they are to be connected.
Drawing a Network Decomposition Diagram. We can illustrate drawing a network decomposi-
tion model by referring once again to the World’s Trend Catalog Division example from earlier 
chapters. World’s Trend sells fashionable men’s, women’s, and children’s clothing online and via 
mail and phone orders. Start by drawing a circle and labeling it “World’s Trend Network.” Now 
draw a number of circles below the first one, as shown in Figure 16.12. These circles represent 
hubs for the Marketing Division and each of the three order-entry and distribution centers (the 
U.S. Division, the Canadian Division, and the Mexican Division).
Extend this drawing further by drawing another level. This time, add the workstations. For 
example, the Marketing Division has two workstations connected to it, whereas the U.S. Division 
has 33 workstations on its LAN (Administration, the Warehouse, the Order-Entry Manager, and 
30 Order-Entry Clerks). This network is simplified for the purpose of providing a readily under-
standable example.
Creating a Hub Connectivity Diagram. A hub connectivity diagram is useful for showing how the 
major hubs are connected. At World’s Trend, shown in Figure 16.13, four major hubs are all con-
nected to one another. In addition, there are external hubs (suppliers) that need to be notified when 
inventory drops below a certain point, and so on. Each of the three country divisions are connected 
to the 21 suppliers; the Marketing Division, however, does not need to be connected to suppliers.
To produce an effective hub connectivity diagram, start by drawing all the hubs. Then experi-
ment (perhaps sketching it first on a sheet of paper) to see which links are necessary. Once that is 
done, redraw the diagram so it is attractive and communicates well to users.
Exploding the Hub Connectivity Diagram into a Workstation Connectivity Diagram. The purpose 
of network modeling is to show the connectivity of workstations in some detail. Therefore, you 
need to explode the hub connectivity diagram. Figure 16.14 shows the 33 workstations for the 
U.S. Division and how they are to be connected.
FIGURE 16.11
Use special symbols when 
drawing network decomposition 
and hub connectivity diagrams.
Hub or Local Area Network
External Network
Multiple External Networks with Similar Functions
Workstation
Multiple Workstations with Similar Functions


===== BOOK PAGE 519 =====

CHAPTER 16  •  QUALITY  A SSURANCE  AND  IMPLEMENTATION      519
FIGURE 16.12
A network decomposition diagram 
for World’s Trend.
World’s
Trend
Network
Marketing
Division
U.S.
Division
Canadian
Division
Mexican
Division
Administra-
tion
U.S.
Warehouse
Order-
Entry
Manager
Order-
Entry Clerks
(30)
Canadian
Warehouse
Order-Entry
Manager
Order-Entry
Clerks
(8)
Mexican
Warehouse
Order-Entry
Manager
Order-Entry
Clerks
(4)
Advertising
Manager
Catalog
Publications
Suppliers
(21)
FIGURE 16.13
A hub connectivity diagram for 
World’s Trend.
Marketing
Division
Mexican
Division
Canadian
Division
U.S.
Division
50 miles
625 miles
1–3,500 miles 
1 0–3,500 miles 
2,750 miles
50–3,500 miles Suppliers
(21)
The diagrams for this level are drawn by examining the third level of the network decomposi-
tion diagram. Group items such as Order-Entry Manager and Order-Entry Clerks together because 
they must be connected. Use a special symbol to show multiple workstations and indicate in 
parentheses the number of similar workstations. In our example, there are 30 Order-Entry Clerks.
Place workstations that must be connected to other hubs on the perimeter of the diagram. 
In this way, it will be easier to represent these connections using arrows. Draw the external


===== BOOK PAGE 520 =====

520    PART V  •  QUALITY ASSURANCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
connections in a different color or use thicker arrows. External connections are usually long 
distance. For example, Administration is connected to the Marketing Division, which is 50 miles 
away, and also to the Canadian and Mexican Divisions. The Warehouse needs to communicate 
directly with the Canadian and Mexican warehouses in case it is possible to obtain the merchan-
dise from another warehouse. The Order-Entry Manager and Order-Entry Clerks do not have to 
be connected to anyone outside their LAN.
TRAINING USERS
Systems analysts engage in an educational process with users that is called training. Users have 
been involved throughout the SDLC processes, or in the agile approach of having an on-site 
customer, so by now an analyst should have an accurate assessment of the users who must be 
trained.
In the implementation of large projects, an analyst often will be managing the training rather 
than personally being involved in it. One of the most prized assets an analyst can bring to any 
training situation is the ability to see the system from the user’s viewpoint. An analyst must never 
forget what it is like to face a new system. Those recollections can help analysts empathize with 
users and facilitate their training.
Training Strategies
Training strategies are determined by who is being trained and who will train them. An analyst 
will want to ensure that anyone whose work is affected by the new IS is properly trained by the 
appropriate trainer.
Whom to Train. All people who will have primary or secondary use of a system must be 
trained. They include everyone from data-entry personnel to those who will use output to 
make decisions without personally using a computer. The amount of training a system requires 
depends on how much someone’s job will change because of the new interactions required by 
the revised system.
Ensure that users of different skill levels and job interests are separated. It is certain trouble 
to include novices in the same training sessions as experts because novices are quickly lost and 
experts are rapidly bored with basics. Both groups are then lost.
FIGURE 16.14
A workstation connectivity 
diagram for World’s Trend.
300 feet
250
f e e t
200–250 feet
50–100 feet500 feet
To Canadian Division
575 miles
50–3,500 miles
To Suppliers
50 miles
To Marketing Division
To Mexican Division
2,800 miles
To Canadian Division
575 miles
To Mexican Division
2,800 miles
Order-
Entry
Manager
Order-Entry
Clerks
(30)
Administra-
tion
Ware-
house


===== BOOK PAGE 521 =====

CHAPTER 16  •  QUALITY  A SSURANCE  AND  IMPLEMENTATION      521
People Who Train Users. For a large project, many different trainers may be used, depending on 
how many users must be trained and who they are. Possible training sources include the following:
1. Vendors
2. Systems analysts
3. External paid trainers
4. In-house trainers
5. Other system users
This list gives just a few of the options an analyst has in planning for and providing training.
Large vendors often provide off-site one- or two-day training sessions on their equipment 
as part of the service benefits offered when corporations purchase expensive COTS software. 
These sessions include both lectures and hands-on training in a focused environment. They also 
may extend the experience with online user groups, dedicated blogs, or annual user conferences.
Because systems analysts know the organization’s people and the system, they can provide 
good training. The use of analysts for training purposes depends on their availability because they 
are also expected to oversee the complete implementation process.
External paid trainers are sometimes brought into an organization to help with training. They 
may have broad experience in teaching people how to use a variety of computers, but they may 
not give the hands-on training that is needed for some users. In addition, they may not be able to 
custom-tailor their presentations enough to make them meaningful to users.
Full-time, in-house trainers are usually familiar with the skills and learning preferences of 
personnel and can tailor materials to their needs. One of the drawbacks of in-house trainers is that 
they may possess expertise in areas other than IS and may therefore lack the depth of technical 
expertise that users require.
It is also possible to have any of these trainers train a small group of people from each func-
tional area that will be using the new IS. These people can, in turn, train the remaining users. This 
approach works well if the original trainees have access to materials and trainers as resources 
when they themselves are providing training. Otherwise, it might degenerate into a trial-and-error 
situation rather than a structured one.
Guidelines for Training
An analyst has four major guidelines for setting up training: (1) establish measurable objectives, 
(2) use appropriate training methods, (3) select suitable training sites, and (4) employ understand-
able training materials.
Training Objectives. Who is being trained in large part dictates the training objectives. Training 
objectives for each group must be spelled out clearly. Well-defined objectives are of enormous 
help in letting trainees know what is expected of them. In addition, objectives allow evaluation 
of training when it is complete. For example, operators must know such basics as turning on the 
machine, what to do when common errors occur, basic troubleshooting, and how to end an entry.
Training Methods. Each user and operator will need slightly different training. To some extent, their 
jobs determine what they need to know, and their personalities, experience, and backgrounds deter-
mine how they learn best. Some users learn best by seeing, others by hearing, and still others by doing. 
Because it is often not possible to customize training for an individual, using a combination of methods 
may be the best way to proceed. That way, most users are reached through one method or another.
Methods for those who learn best by seeing include demonstrations of equipment and exposure 
to training manuals. Those who learn best by hearing will benefit from lectures about procedures, 
discussions, and question-and-answer sessions among trainers and trainees. Those who learn best 
by doing need hands-on experience with new equipment. For jobs such as that of computer opera-
tor, hands-on experience is essential, whereas a quality assurance manager for a production line 
may only need to see output, learn how to interpret it, and know when it is scheduled to arrive.
Training Sites.  Training takes place in many different locations, some of which are more 
conducive to learning than others. Large computer vendors provide special off-site locations at 
which operable equipment is maintained free of charge. Their trainers offer hands-on experience 
with software and hardware, as well as seminars in settings that allow users to concentrate on 
learning the new system. One of the disadvantages of off-site training is that users are away from 
the organization context in which they must eventually perform.


===== BOOK PAGE 522 =====

522    PART V  •  QUALITY ASSURANCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
On-site training in the users’ organization is possible with several different kinds of trainers. 
The advantage is that users see the equipment placed as it will be when it is fully operational in the 
organization context. A serious disadvantage is that trainees often feel guilty about not fulfilling 
their regular job duties if they remain on-site for training. Thus, full concentration on training 
may not be possible.
Off-site training sites are available for a fee through consultants and vendors. Training sites 
can be set up in places with rented meeting space, such as a hotel, or may even be permanent 
facilities maintained by the trainers. These arrangements allow workers to be free from regular 
job demands, but they may not provide equipment for hands-on training.
Training Materials. In planning for the training of users, systems analysts must realize the impor-
tance of well-prepared training materials. These materials include training manuals; training cases, 
in which users are assigned to work through a case that incorporates most of the commonly 
encountered interactions with the system; and prototypes and mockups of output. Users of larger 
systems sometimes will be able to train on elaborate web-based simulations or software that is 
identical to what is being written or purchased. Most COTS software vendors provide online tuto-
rials that illustrate basic functions, and vendors may maintain websites that feature pages devoted 
to FAQs, which can be downloaded and printed. Changes to manuals can be gleaned from many 
vendors’ websites.
The user’s understanding of a system depends on training materials being clearly written 
for the correct audience with a minimum of jargon. Training materials should be well indexed 
and available to everyone who needs them. A summary of considerations for training objectives, 
methods, sites, and materials is provided in Figure 16.15.
CONVERSION TO A NEW SYSTEM
A third approach to implementing a system is to physically convert an old IS to a new or modified 
one. Many conversion strategies are available to analysts, as well as a contingency approach that 
considers several user and organization variables in deciding which conversion strategy to use. 
There is no single best way to proceed with conversion. The importance of adequate planning and 
with whom you have been working. Both Laurie and Wade have 
come to the team privately with different concerns.
Wade told you, “I’m mad that I have to type in my own data in the 
sessions. The Mississippi will freeze solid before I ever do that on my 
job. I’ve got to know when to expect output and how to interpret it when 
it comes. I’m not spending time in training sessions if I can’t get that.”
Laurie, who shares training sessions with Wade, also complained 
to your group, “We should be getting more hands-on training. All 
we hear is a bunch of lectures. Not only that, but the people in the 
group like to spin these ‘fish stories’ about what happened to them 
with the old system. It’s boring. I want to know how to operate the 
thing. It’s bait and switch if you ask me. I’m not learning what you 
said I would, and besides, with all those managers in there, I feel 
like a fish out of water.”
What problems are occurring with the training sessions? How 
can they be addressed given the scheduling constraints mentioned? 
What basic advice on setting up training sessions did your team 
ignore? Write a one-page response to these questions.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 16.4 
You Can Lead a Fish to Water . . . but You Can’t Make It Drink
S am Monroe, Belle Uga, Wally Ide, and you make up a four-
member systems analysis team that is developing an IS to help 
managers monitor and control water temperature, the number 
of fish released, and other factors at a large commercial fish 
hatchery. (They were last seen in “To Hatch a Fish,” Consulting 
Opportunity 6.3, when they asked you, as their fourth member, 
to help solve a problem involving the timely delivery of a 
system prototype.)
With your input, the team successfully turned the tide of 
the earlier dilemma, and the project has continued. Now you are 
discussing the training that you have begun to undertake for managers 
and other systems users. Due to some scheduling difficulties, you 
have decided to cut down on the number of training sessions offered, 
which has resulted in users at a variety of levels of management 
and computer expertise being in the same training sessions in  
some instances.
Laurie Hook, one of the operators who is being trained, has been 
in the same training “tank” with Wade Boot, one of the managers


===== BOOK PAGE 523 =====

CHAPTER 16  •  QUALITY  A SSURANCE  AND  IMPLEMENTATION      523
scheduling conversion with the strategic involvement of users (which often takes many weeks), 
file backup, and adequate security cannot be overemphasized.
Conversion Strategies
The five strategies for converting from the old system to the new one are shown in Figure 16.16:
1. Direct changeover
2. Parallel conversion
3. Gradual, or phased, conversion
4. Modular conversion
5. Distributed conversion
Each of the five conversion approaches is described separately in the following subsections.
Direct Changeover. Conversion by direct changeover means that, on a specified date, users stop 
using the old system, and the new system is put into use. Direct changeover can be successful 
only if extensive testing is done beforehand, and it works best when some delays in processing 
can be tolerated. Direct changeover is considered a risky approach to conversion. Disruption to 
the work environment may occur if users resent being forced to use an unfamiliar system, without 
recourse. Finally, there is no adequate way to compare new results with old.
Parallel Conversion. Parallel conversion refers to running an old system and a new system at the 
same time, in parallel. When the same results can be gained over time, the new system continues to 
be used and the old one is stopped. One advantage of running both systems in parallel is the pos-
sibility of checking new data against old data to catch any errors in processing in the new system.  
FIGURE 16.15
Appropriate training objectives, 
methods, sites, and materials 
depend on many factors.
Elements Relevant Factors
Training Objectives
Training Methods
Depend on requirements of user’s job
Depend on user’s job, personality, background, and experience;
use combination of lecture, demonstration, hands-on, and study
Depend on training objectives, cost, availability; free vendor sites
with operable equipment; in-house installation; rented facilities
Depend on user’s needs; operating manuals, cases, prototypes
of equipment and output; online tutorials
Training Sites
Training Materials
FIGURE 16.16
Five conversion strategies for IS.
Direct Changeover
Distributed Conversion
Modular Conversion
Gradual Conversion
Parallel Conversion
Conversion Method                 Changes Over Time


===== BOOK PAGE 524 =====

524    PART V  •  QUALITY ASSURANCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
The main disadvantages include the cost of running two systems at the same time and the burden 
on employees by virtually doubling their workload during conversion.
Gradual Conversion. Gradual, or phased, conversion attempts to combine the best features of  
the two previously mentioned plans without incurring all the risks. In this plan, the volume 
of transactions handled by the new system is gradually increased as the system is phased in. 
The advantages of this approach include allowing users to get used to the system gradually, the 
possibility of detecting and recovering from errors without a lot of downtime, and the ability to 
add features one by one. Agile methodologies tend to use this conversion approach.
Modular Conversion. Modular conversion uses the building of self-contained, operational sub-
systems to change from old systems to new in a gradual manner. As each module is modified and 
accepted, it is put into use. One advantage is that each module is thoroughly tested before being 
used. Another advantage is that users are familiar with each module as it becomes operational. 
Their feedback has helped determine the final attributes of the system. Object-oriented method-
ologies often use this approach.
Distributed Conversion. Distributed conversion refers to a situation in which many installations 
of the same system are contemplated, as is the case in banking or in franchises such as restaurants 
or clothing stores. One entire conversion is done (with any of the four approaches considered 
previously) at one site. When that conversion is successfully completed, other conversions are 
done for other sites. An advantage of distributed conversion is that problems can be detected and 
contained rather than inflicted simultaneously on all sites. A disadvantage is that even when one 
conversion is successful, each site will have its own people and culture, along with regional and 
local peculiarities to work through, and they must be handled accordingly.
Other Conversion Considerations
Conversion entails other details for an analyst, including the following:
1. Ordering equipment (up to three months ahead of planned conversion). Any slowdowns or 
changes in the supply chain need to be accommodated in this planning as well.
2. Ordering any necessary materials that are externally supplied to the IS, such as toner 
cartridges, paper, preprinted forms, and storage media. Again, be mindful of slowdowns 
brought on by supply-chain issues.
3. Appointing a manager to supervise, or personally supervising, the preparation of the instal-
lation site.
4. Planning, scheduling, and supervising programmers and data entry personnel who must 
convert all relevant files and databases.
For many implementations, the chief roles of the systems analyst are to accurately estimate 
the time needed for each activity, appoint people to manage each subproject, and coordinate their  
work. For smaller projects, much of the conversion work is done by the analyst. Many of the 
project management techniques discussed in Chapter 3, such as Gantt charts, PERT, function 
point analysis, and successfully communicating with team members, are useful for planning and 
controlling implementation.
Organizational Metaphors and Their Relationship to  
Successful Systems
Be aware of organizational metaphors when implementing a just-developed system. Our 
research in North America has suggested that the success or failure of a system may be related to 
the metaphors used by organizational members.
When people in an organization describe the company as a zoo, you can infer that the atmo-
sphere is chaotic; if they describe it as a machine, everything is working in an orderly fashion. 
When the predominant metaphor is war, journey, or jungle, the environment is chaotic, as with the 
zoo. The war and journey metaphors are oriented toward an organization goal, however, whereas 
the zoo and jungle metaphors are not.
Metaphors such as society, family, and the game also signify order and rules. Although the 
machine and game metaphors are goal oriented, the society and zoo metaphors do not stress


===== BOOK PAGE 525 =====

CHAPTER 16  •  QUALITY  A SSURANCE  AND  IMPLEMENTATION      525
the company’s goal but instead allow individuals in the corporation to set their own standards and  
rewards. Another metaphor, organism, appears balanced between order and chaos, corporate  
and individual goals.
Our research suggests that the success or failure of a system may have something to do with 
the predominant metaphor. Figure 16.17 shows that a traditional MIS will tend to succeed when the  
predominant metaphor is society, machine, or family, but it might not succeed if the metaphor is 
war or jungle (two chaotic metaphors). Notice, however, that competitive systems will most likely 
succeed if the metaphor is war.
Positive metaphors appear to be game, organism, and machine. Negative metaphors appear to 
be jungle and zoo. The others (journey, war, society, and family) show mixed success, depending 
on the type of IS being developed. More research needs to be done in this area. In the meantime, 
systems analysts should be aware that metaphors communicated in interviews could be meaningful 
and may even be a factor that contributes to the success of the IS implementation.
SECURITY CONCERNS FOR TRADITIONAL AND  
WEB-BASED SYSTEMS
Security of computer facilities, stored data, and the information generated is part of a successful 
conversion. Recognition of the need for security is a natural outgrowth of the belief that informa-
tion is a key organizational resource. With increasingly complex transactions and many innova-
tive exchanges, the web has brought heightened security concerns to the IS professional’s world.
It is useful to think of security of systems, data, and information on an imaginary continuum 
from totally secure to totally open. Although there is no such thing as a totally secure system, the 
actions analysts and users take are meant to move systems toward the secure end of the continuum 
by lessening the system’s vulnerability. It should be noted that as more people in the organiza-
tion gain greater computer power, gain access to the web, or connect to intranets and extranets, 
security becomes increasingly difficult and complex. The rise of widespread remote or hybrid 
(part in person, part remote) work in the emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic also increased 
security risks. Sometimes, organizations will hire a security consultant to work with a systems 
analyst when security is crucial to successful operations.
Security is the responsibility of all those who come into contact with the system and is 
only as good as the laxest behavior or policy in the organization. Security has three interrelated 
FIGURE 16.17
Organizational metaphors may 
contribute to the success or failure 
of an IS.
Success less
likely with these
metaphors
Success more
likely with these
metaphors
War
Jungle
War
Journey
Jungle
Zoo
Family
Society
Machine
Family
Society
Organism
Traditional MIS
Decision Support Systems
Expert Systems/Al
Society
Zoo
Zoo
Family
Society
Journey
Zoo
Game
Organism
Machine
Journey
Game
Organism
War
Game
Organism
Organism
Game
Cooperative Systems
Competitive Systems
Executive Information Systems
Type of Information System


===== BOOK PAGE 526 =====

526    PART V  •  QUALITY ASSURANCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
aspects: physical, logical, and behavioral. All three must work together if the quality of security 
is to remain high.
Physical Security
Physical security refers to securing the computer facility, its equipment, and software through 
physical means. It can include controlling access to the computer room by means of machine-
readable badges, biometric systems, or a human sign-in/sign-out system, as well as using closed-
circuit television cameras to monitor computer areas, backing up data frequently, and storing 
backups in a fireproof, waterproof area, often at a secure off-site location, or using data storage 
provided by cloud vendors.
In addition, small computer equipment should be secured so that a typical user cannot move 
it, and it should be guaranteed uninterrupted power. Alarms that notify appropriate people of fire, 
flood, or unauthorized human intrusion must be in working order at all times.
Decisions about physical security should be made along with users when an analyst is 
planning for computer facilities and equipment purchases. Obviously, physical security can be 
much tighter if anticipated in advance of installation and if computer rooms are specially equipped 
for security when they are constructed rather than outfitted as an afterthought.
Logical Security
Logical security refers to logical controls in the software itself. The logical controls familiar to 
most users are passwords or authorization codes of some sort. When used, they permit the user 
with the correct password to enter the system or a particular part of a database.
Passwords, however, are treated cavalierly in many organizations. Employees have been 
overheard yelling a password across crowded offices, taping passwords to their display screens, 
and sharing personal passwords with authorized employees who have forgotten their own.
Special encryption software has been developed to protect commercial transactions on 
the Web, and business transactions are proliferating. Internet fraud is also up sharply, however. 
Few authorities are trained in catching internet criminals, and a “wild west” or “last frontier” 
mentality is clearly evidenced in those instances when authorities have been able to apprehend 
web criminals.
One way for networks to cut down on the risk of exposure to security challenges from the 
outside world is to build a firewall or firewall system. A firewall constructs a barricade between 
an internal organization’s network and an external (inter)network, such as the internet. The 
internal network is assumed to be trustworthy and secure, whereas the internet is not. Firewalls 
are intended to prevent communication into or out of the network that has not been authorized 
and that is not wanted. A firewall system is not a perfect remedy for organization and internet 
security; it is, however, an additional layer of security that is now widely endorsed. There is no 
fully integrated way to address security problems with internal and external networks, but they 
do deserve analysts’ attention when planning any new or improved systems.
Logical and physical controls are important but clearly not enough to provide adequate secu-
rity. Behavioral changes are also necessary.
Behavioral Security
The behavioral expectations of an organization are implicit in its policy manuals and even on 
signs posted in workrooms and lunchrooms, as we saw in Chapter 5. The behavior that organiza-
tion members internalize, however, is also critical to the success of security efforts. (One reason 
firewalls are not attack-proof is that many attacks to IS come from within the organization.)
Security can begin with screening employees who will eventually have access to computers, 
data, and information to ensure that their interests are consistent with the organization’s interests 
and that they fully understand the importance of carrying through on security procedures. Policies 
regarding security must be written, distributed, and updated so employees are fully aware of 
expectations and responsibilities. Typically, a systems analyst will first have contact with the 
behavioral aspects of security. Some organizations have written rules or policies prohibiting 
employees from surfing the web during work hours, or even prohibiting web surfing altogether if 
company equipment is involved. Other corporations use software locks to limit access to websites 
judged to be objectionable in the workplace, such as game, gambling, or pornographic sites.


===== BOOK PAGE 527 =====

CHAPTER 16  •  QUALITY  A SSURANCE  AND  IMPLEMENTATION      527
Part of behavioral security is monitoring behavior at irregular intervals to ascertain that 
proper procedures are being followed and to correct any behaviors that may have eroded with 
time. Having a system log the number of unsuccessful sign-on attempts of users is one way to 
monitor whether unauthorized users are attempting to sign on to the system. Periodic and frequent 
inventorying of equipment and software is desirable. In addition, unusually long sessions or 
atypical after-hours access to the system should be examined.
Employees should clearly understand what is expected of them, what is prohibited, and the 
extent of their rights and responsibilities. For example, in the United States and the European 
Union, employers are legally obligated to disclose all monitoring that is being done or that is 
being contemplated, and they must supply the rationale behind it. Such disclosure should include 
whether there is use of video cameras, software, and phone monitoring. Other countries have their 
own laws regarding legal usage of these devices and software for monitoring.
Output generated by a system must be recognized for its potential to put an organization at 
risk in some circumstances. Controls for output include displays that can only be accessed via 
password, the classification of information (that is, to whom it can be distributed and when), and 
secure storage of printed and stored documents, no matter what their format.
In some cases, provisions must be made for shredding documents that are classified or pro-
prietary. Shredding or pulverization services can be contracted from an outside firm that, for a fee, 
will shred magnetic media, printer cartridges, and paper. A large corporation may shred upward 
of 76,000 pounds of output in a variety of media annually.
Two-Factor Authentication for Improved Security
When used for securing computer systems or mobile devices, two-factor authentication (2FA) 
is a two-step verification or dual-factor authentication security process where users give 
two unique authetification factors to verify their authorization to access a system or software 
(techtarget.com). Using two-factor authentification, the user chooses two or three of the following: 
something they know, something they possess, or something they are . In the future, analysts 
may seek three-factor authentication, which means that users will need to possess a physical 
token and a password, used along with biometric data, instances of which are retinal scans, 
voiceprints, and scans of fingerprints.
Special Security Considerations for Ecommerce
It is well known that intruders can violate the integrity of any computer system. Analysts need to 
take a series of precautions to protect the computer network from both internal and external web 
security threats. A number of actions and products can help:
1. Software that can detect and remove malware.
2. Email filtering products that provide policy-based email and email attachment scanning 
and filtering to protect companies against both incoming and outgoing email. Incoming 
scanning protects against spam (unsolicited email such as advertising) attacks, and outgo-
ing scanning protects against the loss of proprietary information.
3. URL filtering products that provide employees with access to the web by user, by groups 
of users, by computers, by the time, or by the day of the week.
4. Firewalls, gateways, and virtual private networks that prevent hackers from gaining back-
door access to a corporate network.
5. Intrusion detection and antiphishing products that continually monitor usage, provide mes-
sages and reports, and suggest actions to take.
6. Vulnerability management products that assess the potential risks in a system and discover 
and report vulnerabilities. Some products correlate the vulnerabilities to make it easier to 
find the root cause of the security breach. Risk cannot be eliminated, but this software can 
help manage the risk by balancing security risk versus the financial bottom line.
7. Security technologies such as SSL/TLS (Secure Sockets Layer and the preferred Transport 
Layer Security) for authentication and to encrypt and protect data sent over the internet or 
a network.
8. Encryption technologies such as secure electronic transaction.
9. Public key infrastructure (PKI) and digital certificates (obtained from a company such 
as VeriSign). Use of digital certificates ensures that the reported sender of the message is 
really the company that sent the message.


===== BOOK PAGE 528 =====

528    PART V  •  QUALITY ASSURANCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
Implementation Concerns for the Internet of Things
With so many applications and devices featuring internet connectivity, it is inevitable that you will 
be faced with designing networks (or partial networks) that have the capability to connect with 
the larger Internet of Things (IoT), which includes among other devices:
• Digital assistants
• Thermostats
• Automobiles
• More advanced sensors for climate and hospital environments
• Microcontrollers
• Communication technology
It is imperative that a solid business reason or clear return on investment (ROI) can be estab-
lished for the implementation of IoT. As this is being written, a majority of business leaders cannot 
see a clear ROI for IoT. A clear goal for undertaking an IoT project must be established. Analysts 
can facilitate decision makers’ understanding of the benefits of undertaking development of IoT 
for the organization.
Because of their sophisticated and complex nature, the chips that are the cornerstone of these 
technologies have been slowed in the global supply chain due to the pandemic and other world-
wide challenges. Less complex chips, such as those needed for CPUs, while facing supply-chain 
issues, have not been as drastically affected and will be in readier supply.
Unfortunately, the push for connectivity through IoT has not been met with an equally robust 
determination to secure IoT. All of the devices that are capable of being added to IoT send and 
receive data via the internet. Setting up security for computer networks is second nature for 
systems analysts. However, the same cannot be said for the Internet of Things, which might be 
created in an ad hoc way. The FBI has taken this threat seriously and has even issued warnings to 
consumers that their home devices are not secure and are vulnerable through the connection of 
unsecured devices to the internet. Hackers can easily find a way into a home office router.
Unauthorized devices can be added to IoT without proper planning (or even automatically) 
by those in the organization eager to be part of a network. Unsecured devices are susceptible to 
hackers who can easily get a path to corporate or personal routers if precautions are not taken.
Cybersecurity planning should be embedded in systems planning from the inception of the 
proposed project so that it is integrated, and associated costs are planned for as well. Devices 
should be added slowly and monitored throughout the life cycle. Teams versed in IoT should be 
included in any planning and implementation projects.
Here is a list of precautions systems analysts can take to reduce the risk of cybercrime associ-
ated with IoT implementation:
1. Inventory all devices involved in IoT.
2. Ensure that all devices identified are trustworthy.
3. Identify risk threats posed by any vulnerable devices.
4. Mitigate any risks with tracking and appropriate upgrades and/or deletions.
5. Monitor all devices for cyber risks throughout the life cycle of IoT.
Privacy Considerations for Ecommerce
The other side of security is privacy. To make a website more secure, you must ask the user or 
customer to give up some privacy.
Web designers recognize that the company for which you design exercises a great deal of power 
over the data its customers are providing. The same tenets of ethical and legal behavior apply to 
website design as to the design of any traditional application that accepts personal data from custom-
ers. The Web, however, allows the data to be collected faster and allows different data to be collected 
(such as the browsing habits of the customer). In general, information technology makes it possible 
to store more data in data warehouses, process that data, and distribute the data more widely.
Every company for which you design an ecommerce application should adopt a privacy 
policy. Here are some guidelines:
1. Start with a corporate policy on privacy. Make sure it is prominently displayed on the 
website so all customers can access the policy whenever they complete a transaction.


===== BOOK PAGE 529 =====

CHAPTER 16  •  QUALITY  A SSURANCE  AND  IMPLEMENTATION      529
2. Ask only for information the application requires to complete the transaction at hand. For 
example, is it necessary to the transaction to ask a person’s age or gender?
3. Make it optional for customers to fill out personal information on the website. Some 
customers do not mind receiving targeted messages, but you should always give customers 
an opportunity to maintain the confidentiality of their personal data by not responding.
4. Use sources that allow you to obtain anonymous information about classes of customers. 
There are companies that offer audience profiling technology and technology solutions 
for management of advertisements, their targeting, and their delivery. They do so by 
maintaining a dynamic database of consumer profiles without linking them to individuals, 
thereby respecting customers’ rights to privacy.
5. Be ethical. Avoid the latest cheap trick that permits your client to gather information about 
the customer in highly suspect ways. Tricks such as screen scraping (capturing remotely 
what is on a customer’s screen) and email cookie grabbing are clear violations of privacy 
and may prove to be illegal as well.
A coordinated policy of security and privacy is essential. It is essential to establish these 
policies and adhere to them when implementing an ecommerce application.
Disaster Recovery Planning
No matter how diligently you and your organizational colleagues work to ensure the security and 
stability of systems, all employees and systems are inevitably vulnerable to some kind of natural 
or human-caused disaster that threatens security as well as the functioning of the business. Some 
disasters are quite common, such as power outages. We can assess the probability of some disas-
ters occurring, such as a hurricane or an earthquake. However, many disasters are unexpected in 
their timing or their severity, perhaps even causing loss of life, creating chaos for people and the 
organization itself.
The fields of disaster preparedness and disaster recovery are interdependent, and they 
build on each other. Disaster preparedness includes what a company should do if it encounters a 
crisis. The field of disaster recovery is focused on how a business can continue in the aftermath of 
a disaster and how it can restore essential systems in the IT infrastructure. This section focuses on 
disaster recovery as it relates to IS. The traditional disaster recovery process consists of planning, 
a walkthrough, practice drills, and recovery from the disaster.
When hit with a disaster, a company stands to lose people, money, reputation, and its own 
assets, as well as those of its clients. It is important to do the right things to minimize potential 
losses. Analysts should determine what the organization’s level of disaster planning is and how 
well articulated the role of IS is in their disaster response and recovery plans. The key questions 
analysts must ask early on are (1) whether employees know where to go and (2) what to do in 
the face of a disaster. The answers to these questions will guide further planning. Conventional 
wisdom provides seven elements to consider during and after a disaster. As you will see, many of 
them involve IS and relate specifically to the planning required of the systems analyst:
1. Identify the teams responsible for managing a crisis.
2. Eliminate single points of failure.
3. Determine data replication technologies that match the organization’s timetable for getting 
systems up and running.
4. Create detailed relocation and transportation plans.
5. Establish multiple communication channels among employees and consultants who are on-
site, such as analysis teams.
6. Provide recovery solutions that include an off-site location.
7. Ensure the physical and psychological well-being of employees and others who may be 
physically present at the work site when a disaster hits.
The disaster preparedness plan should identify who, in the event of a disaster, is responsible 
for making several pivotal decisions. These include decisions about whether business operations 
will continue, how to support communications (both computer and voice), where people will 
be sent if the business is uninhabitable, where personnel will go in an emergency, seeing to the 
personal and psychological needs of the people present in the business and those who might be 
working virtually, and restoring the main computing and work environments.


===== BOOK PAGE 530 =====

530    PART V  •  QUALITY ASSURANCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
Redundancy of data provides the key for eliminating single points of failure for servers 
running web applications. An analyst can be especially helpful in setting up this type of backup 
and redundancy.
The advent of open source, software-defined storage has meant a streamlining of storage 
operations, greater efficiency, and lower costs. Some industry analysts predict that Storage as a 
Service (STaaS), where organizations can just rent the storage they need, will eventually take over 
the work of storage area networks (SANs) during the coming decade (Robb, 2022). In the past, 
some businesses used SANs to get away from some of the unreliability associated with physical 
tape backups and storage. Synchronous remote replication, also called data mirroring, for nearly 
real-time backup also gained favor in the past. However, if companies are farther than 100 miles 
away from the site, the data mirroring process can be affected. Asynchronous remote replication 
sends data to a secondary storage location at designated time intervals. Online options are avail-
able for small businesses too.
An organization should develop and distribute a one-page memo that contains evacuation 
routes and employee assembly points. This should be distributed to everyone in the organization. 
The three common choices are to send employees home, to have them remain on-site, or to relo-
cate them to a recovery facility set up to continue operations. The entire gamut of transportation 
options should be considered when developing this memo.
Organization and analysis team members must be able to communicate in the event that 
typical email is disrupted. If email is unavailable for broadcasting an emergency message, an 
emergency information web page or emergency hotline can serve as a viable alternative. Recently, 
some software companies have started offering a suite of software tools that permits ad hoc 
communication by emergency response agencies that allows them to rapidly set up secure V oIP, web 
connectivity, and Wi-Fi hot spot capabilities. Wider availability and lower prices will undoubtedly 
bring these important communication capabilities to other types of organizations in the future.
Agua concurs, saying, “It would be music to my ears, it would 
be really sweet if they would work with us to spot trends and 
changes—and then respond quickly.”
Stern’s, based in Blackpool, England, is a European beverage 
maker and the developer and producer of Sipps. Sipps is a sweet, 
fruit-flavored, nonalcoholic, noncarbonated drink served chilled 
or with ice, and it is particularly popular when the weather is 
hot. Sipps has sold briskly in Europe and grown in popularity 
in the United States since its introduction five years ago, but 
the company has had a difficult time adequately managing 
inventory and keeping up with U.S. customer demand, which is 
affected by seasonal temperature fluctuations. Places with year-
round, warm-temperature climates and lots of tourists (such as 
Florida and California) have large standing orders, but other 
areas of the country could benefit from a less cumbersome, 
more responsive order-placing process. A network of local 
distributors located throughout the United States and Canada  
distributes Sipps.
Devise a systems solution that will address the problems 
discussed there. (Hint: The technology is important, but so is the 
way people can use it.) Your solution should stress collaboration, 
flexibility, adaptability, and access. Use network diagramming to 
illustrate your solution. In a few paragraphs, write a rationale for 
why your solution should be chosen.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 16.5 
The Sweet Smell of Success
S olana Agua, who represents one of the many U.S. distributors 
of the European soft drink Sipps, gazes unhappily at the weather 
app on her smartphone, which shows a map of the United States 
saturated with dark red, indicating that most of the country is 
experiencing an early spring heat wave, with no signs of a letup. 
Holding up the screen of her smartphone as she speaks to the 
assembled systems group, she says, “It’s the best thing that could 
happen to us, or at least it should be. But when we had to place our 
orders three months ago, we had no idea that this spring monster 
heat wave was going to devour the country this way!” Nodding her 
head toward a picture of their European plant hung on the wall, she 
continues, “We need to be able to tell them when things are hot over 
here so we can get enough product. Otherwise, we’ll miss out every 
time. This happened two years ago, and it just about ruined us.
“Each of us distributors meets with our district managers to 
do three-month planning. When we agree, we email our orders to 
European headquarters. They make their own adjustments, bottle 
the drinks, and then we get our modified orders about 9 to 15 weeks 
later. But we need ways to tell them what’s going on now. Why, we 
even have some new superstores that are opening up here. They 
should know we have extra-high demand.”
Corky, her assistant, agrees, saying, “Yeah, they should at least 
look at our past sales around this time of year. Some springs are hot, 
others are just average.”


===== BOOK PAGE 531 =====

CHAPTER 16  •  QUALITY  A SSURANCE  AND  IMPLEMENTATION      531
To better protect an organization’s backup systems and to ensure the continued, uninterrupted 
flow of banking transactions in the event of a disaster, regulations in the United States stipulate 
that off-site bank locations must be at least 100 miles away from the original site. Paper files and 
backups also present a monumental problem and are highly vulnerable to natural and human-
caused disasters; organizations are strongly encouraged to create a plan that helps them move 
toward a digital documentation project that is meant to convert all of their paper documents to 
electronic formats within three to five years of inception (Stephens, 2003).
Support for people working at an organization that experiences a disaster is paramount. There 
must be plentiful and easily available water, especially if employees are unable to leave the site for 
a number of days due to outside weather conditions or partial building collapses. Although food 
is important, water is more so. Employees should be issued a safety kit containing water, a dust 
mask, a flashlight, glow sticks, and a whistle. One way to learn what should comprise a personal 
workspace disaster supplies kit is to go to the American Red Cross website (www.redcross.org), 
which provides details for support during disasters and in their aftermath.
EVALUATION
Throughout the SDLC, an analyst, management, and users have been evaluating the evolving IS 
and networks to give feedback for their eventual improvement. Evaluation is called for following 
system implementation as well.
Evaluation Techniques
Recognizing that ongoing evaluation of IS and networks is important; many evaluation techniques 
have been devised. These techniques include cost–benefit analysis (as discussed in Chapter 3); 
models that attempt to estimate the value of a decision based on the effects of revised informa-
tion using information theory, simulation, or Bayesian statistics; user evaluations that emphasize 
implementation problems and user involvement; and IS utility approaches that examine the prop-
erties of information.
Each type of evaluation serves a different purpose and has inherent drawbacks. Cost–
benefit analysis may be difficult to apply because IS provide information about objectives for 
the first time, making it impossible to compare performance before and after implementation 
of the system or distributed network. The revised decision evaluation approach presents 
difficulty because all variables involved with the design, development, and implementation of 
the IS cannot be calculated or quantified. The user involvement approach yields some insight 
for new projects by providing a checklist of potentially dysfunctional behavior by various 
organizational members, but it stresses implementation over other aspects of IS design. The 
IS utility approach to evaluation can be more comprehensive than the others if it is expanded 
and systematically applied.
The Information System Utility Approach
The information system utility approach for evaluating IS can be a comprehensive and fruitful 
technique for measuring the success of a developed system. It can serve as a guide in the develop-
ment of any future projects an analyst might undertake as well.
Utilities of information include possession, form, place, and time. To evaluate the IS compre-
hensively, these utilities must be expanded to include actualization utility and goal utility. Then the 
utilities can be seen to address adequately the questions of who (possession), what (form), where 
(place), when (time), how (actualization), and why (goal). An example of this information utility 
approach is illustrated in the evaluation of a blood inventory system in Figure 16.18.
An IS can be evaluated as successful if it possesses all six of these utilities. If the system 
module is judged as “poor” in providing one of the utilities, the entire module will be destined to 
fail. A partial or “fair” attainment of a utility will result in a partially successful module. If the IS 
module is judged as “good” in providing every utility, the module is a success.
Possession Utility. Possession utility answers the question of who should receive output, or, in 
other words, who should be responsible for making decisions. Information has no value in the 
hands of someone who lacks the power to make improvements in the system or someone who 
lacks the ability to use the information productively.


===== BOOK PAGE 532 =====

532    PART V  •  QUALITY ASSURANCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
Form Utility. Form utility answers the question of what kind of output is distributed to the deci-
sion maker. The documents must be useful for a particular decision maker in terms of document 
format and the jargon used. Acronyms and column headings must be meaningful to the user. 
Furthermore, information itself must be in an appropriate form. For example, the user should 
not have to divide one number by another to obtain a ratio. Instead, a ratio should be calculated 
and prominently displayed. At the other extreme is the presentation of too much irrelevant data. 
Information overload certainly decreases the value of an IS.
Place Utility. Place utility answers the question of where the information is distributed. 
Information must be delivered to the location where the decision is made. More detailed reports 
or previous management reports should be filed or stored to facilitate future access.
Time Utility. Time utility answers the question of when information is delivered. Information 
must arrive before a decision is made. Late information has no utility. At the other extreme is the 
delivery of information too far in advance of the decision. Reports may become inaccurate or may 
be forgotten if delivered prematurely.
Actualization Utility. Actualization utility involves how the information is introduced and used by 
the decision maker. First, the IS has value if it possesses the ability to be implemented. Second, 
actualization utility implies that an IS has value if it is maintained after its designers depart, or if 
a one-time use of the IS obtains satisfactory and long-lasting results.
Goal Utility. Goal utility answers the “why” of IS by asking whether the output has value in 
helping the organization obtain its objectives. The goal of the IS must not only be in line with the 
goals of decision makers but it must also reflect their priorities.
FIGURE 16.18
Evaluating a blood inventory information and decision support system using the information system utility approach.
Information
Systems 
Modules
Form 
Utility
Time 
Utility
Place 
Utility
Possession 
Utility
Actualization
Utility
Goal 
Utility
Inventory 
Lists
Success
Good. Acronyms
used were the same 
as shipping codes.
As systems grew,
too much  information
was  presented; this
overload called 
for summary 
information.
Poor. The people
who allocated
blood mistrusted
the mysterious
numbers produced
by the computer.
Good. Reports
were received
at least one
hour before 
scheduled
shipments on 
a daily basis.
Good. Inventory
lists were printed at
the regional blood
center. Lists were 
delivered to hospitals
with the current
shipments.
Good. Implemen-
tation was easy
because hospitals
found the inven-
tory lists to be
extremely useful.
Good. The  same
people who origi-
nally kept manual
records received
these reports.
Good. Information
about the location
of particular units
was made
available.
Poor. This was
not an immediate
goal of the blood
region. Shipping
costs were passed
on to patients.
Poor. Too many
people were in-
volved with blood
inventories to be
able to participate
in the design of
the system.
Fair. Adminis-
trators responsible
for daily blood
allocation received
the original.
Good. Printed at 
blood center.
Good. Reports
were provided
one hour before
allocation deci-
sions were made.
Heuristic 
Allocation 
Failure
Good. Shortages
were prevented by
calling in more
donors.
Good. Output
design could
have been more
participative.
Good. Adminis-
trators concerned
with distribution
and collections
received the report. 
Good. Printed at 
blood center.
Good. Forecasts
were updated
daily.
Good. A forecast
was issued for
each blood type.
Short-Term
Forecasting
Success
Good. Summary
reports helped
reduce outdating
and prevent
shortages.
Good. Blood
administrators
participated in
the design of the
reports.
Good. Blood admin-
istrators who origin-
ally kept manual
reports received
these reports.
Good. Summary
reports were
printed at the
center where
they were 
needed. 
Good. Same 
as  listings.
Good. Summary report
was designed to exact
format speciﬁcations
of manual summary 
reports developed by 
the blood administrator
for city hospitals.
Management
Summary
Reports
Success


===== BOOK PAGE 533 =====

CHAPTER 16  •  QUALITY  A SSURANCE  AND  IMPLEMENTATION      533
EVALUATING CORPORATE WEBSITES
Evaluating the corporate website analysts are developing or maintaining is an important part of any 
successful implementation effort. Analysts can use the IS utility approach previously described 
to assess the aesthetic qualities, content, and delivery of the site. An analyst or a web developer 
should go one step further and analyze web traffic as well.
A visitor to the website can generate a large amount of useful information to analyze. This 
information can be gathered automatically by capturing information about the source, including 
the previous website the user visited and the keywords used to find the site; the information also 
can be obtained through using cookies (files left on a user’s computer about when they last were 
on the site).
An analyst or a web developer can gain valuable information by using a service such as 
Telium. (Although some services might be free, the pay services usually provide the detail needed 
to evaluate a site in depth. The cost is an ongoing budget item for maintaining the website.) 
Information to help you evaluate your client’s site and make improvements is plentiful and easy 
to obtain. The seven essential items are described next.
1. Know how often your client’s website is visited. The number of hits a website had in the 
past few days, the number of visitor sessions, and the number of pages visited are a few of 
the general things you need to know.
2. Learn details about specific pages on the site. It is possible to get statistics on the most 
requested pages, most requested topics, top paths a visitor takes through the client’s web-
site, or even the most downloaded files. If the website is a commercial one, shopping cart 
reports can show how many visitors were converted into buyers and how many abandoned 
their carts or failed to complete the checkout process.
3. Find out more about the website’s visitors. Visitor demographics and information such 
as the number of visits by a particular visitor in a period of time, whether the visitor is a 
new or a returning one, and who the top visitors are is all valuable information when evalu-
ating a website.
4. Discover whether visitors can properly fill out the forms you designed. If the error 
rate is high, redesign the form and see what happens. Analysis of the statistics will reveal 
whether bad form design was to blame for errors in response.
5. Find out who is referring website visitors to the client’s site. Find out which sites are 
responsible for referring visitors to the client’s website. Get statistics on the top referring 
site, the top search engines leading to the site, and the keywords visitors used to locate your 
client’s website. After promoting a site, you can use web traffic analysis to track whether 
the site promotion really made a difference.
time or anything. We never really did get into the nitty-gritty about 
the finished system with that consulting team. I feel as if we had to 
hire your group just to mop up after what they left.”
After further discussions with Stan Lessink and Jill Oh, the 
company’s chief programmers, you realize that the team that did 
the initial installation had no evaluation mechanism. Suggest a suit-
able framework for evaluating the kinds of concerns Marc raised 
about the system. Outline it in a page. What are the problems that 
can occur when a system is not evaluated systematically? Respond 
in a paragraph.
CONSULTING OPPORTUNITY 16.6 
Mopping Up with the New System
“I don’t know what happened. When the new system was installed, 
the systems analysts made a clean getaway, as far as I can tell,”  
says Marc Schnieder, waxing philosophic. Recall that he is owner of the  
Marc Schnieder Janitorial Supply Company. (You last met Marc in 
Consulting Opportunity 13.1, in which you helped him with his data 
storage needs. In the interim, he has had a new IS installed.)
“The systems analysis team asked us some questions about how 
we liked the new system,” Marc supplies eagerly. “We didn’t really 
know how to tell them that the output wasn’t as spotless as we’d like. 
I mean, it’s confusing. It isn’t getting to the right people at the right


===== BOOK PAGE 534 =====

534    PART V  •  QUALITY ASSURANCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
6. Determine what browsers visitors are using. By knowing what browsers are being used, 
you can add browser-specific features that improve the look and feel of the site and encour-
age visitors to stay longer, thereby improving the stickiness of the site. It helps to know 
whether visitors are using current or outdated browsers.
7. Find out whether the client’s website visitors are interested in advertising. Finally, find 
out whether visitors to the site are interested in the ad campaigns you have on your site, 
such as offering a product on sale for a specific period.
Web activity services can be helpful in evaluating whether a site is meeting its stated objectives in 
terms of traffic, advertising effectiveness, employee productivity, and return on investment. It is 
one of the ways an analyst can evaluate whether the corporate web presence is meeting manage-
ment goals and whether it accurately portrays the organization’s vision.
Summary
A systems analyst can ensure total quality management for analyzing and designing information systems 
in many ways. Six Sigma is a culture, philosophy, methodology, and approach to quality that has as its goal 
the elimination of all defects. A tool for designing a top-down, modular system is called a structure chart. 
Service-oriented architecture is an approach that uses independent services to perform various functions. 
Two of the structured techniques that can aid a systems analyst are procedure manuals and FOLKLORE. 
Systems analysts must choose a technique that fits in well with what was previously used in the organization 
and that allows flexibility and easy modification.
Requirements traceability can be considered part of documentation. It follows the life of a requirement 
in both directions. Ideally, a requirement can be traced back to a business objective and forward to a success-
fully deployed product. Ther are four types of traceability: foreword TO requirements traceability, forward 
FROM traceability, backward FROM requirements traceability, and backward TO requirements traceability.
Testing of specific programs, subsystems, and total systems is essential to quality. System maintenance 
is an important consideration. Both internal and external auditors are used to determine the reliability of 
the system’s information. They communicate their audit findings to others to improve the usefulness of the 
system’s information.
Behavior-driven development is a method that develops software by putting features to the test and 
determining which features succeed, which features fail, and which features may be missing. Developers 
will initially write failing unit tests. Then they will write and rewrite code until the code passes.
Implementation is the process of ensuring that information systems and networks are operational and 
then involving well-trained users in their operation. In large systems projects, the primary role of an analyst 
is overseeing implementation by correctly estimating the time needed and then supervising the installation 
of equipment for information systems.
Distributed systems take advantage of telecommunications technology and database management to 
interconnect people manipulating some of the same data in meaningful but different ways. As hardware 
and software are evaluated, a systems analyst also needs to consider the costs and benefits of employing a 
distributed system to fulfill user requirements. One of the most popular ways to approach distributed systems 
is through the use of a client/server model.
Enterprise resource planning systems are developed for use via the cloud. Standard types of organization 
networks include the local area network and the wide area network. Using a top-down approach, analysts 
can use five symbols to help draw network decomposition and hub connectivity diagrams.
Training users and personnel to interact with the information system is an important part of implementation 
because users usually must be able to run the system without the intervention of an analyst. Conversion is 
the process of changing from an old information system to a new one. The five conversion strategies are 
direct changeover, parallel conversion, phased or gradual conversion, modular conversion, and distributed 
conversion. Research suggests that systems analysts can improve the chances that newly implemented systems 
will be accepted if they develop systems with predominant organization metaphors in mind.
Security of data and systems has taken on increased importance for analysts who are designing more 
ecommerce applications. Security has several facets—physical, logical, and behavioral—that must all work 
together. Analysts can take a number of precautions, such as virus protection software, email filtering, URL 
filters, firewalls, gateways, virtual private networks, intrusion detection products, SSL/TSL, secure electronic 
transaction, and the use of a public key infrastructure to improve privacy, confidentiality, and the security of 
systems, networks, data, individuals, and organizations. Two-factor authentication, also known as two-step 
verification or dual-factor authentication, means that the user provides two unique authentification factors 
to identify themselves and gain access to systems or software. It is considered to be more secure than use of 
a single password to gain access. Three-factor authentication is on the horizon. In addition to implementing


===== BOOK PAGE 535 =====

CHAPTER 16  •  QUALITY  A SSURANCE  AND  IMPLEMENTATION      535
these security behaviors, every company for which you design an ecommerce application should adopt a 
privacy policy following five guidelines.
Analysts are increasingly tasked with developing networks of devices that can connect with the Internet 
of Things (IoT). It is imperative that a solid business reason or clear return on investment (ROI) can be 
established for the implementation of IoT, which is fraught with security concerns.
Even when you take all possible measures to ensure system security, privacy, and stability, all employ-
ees and systems are vulnerable to natural or human-caused disasters. Disaster recovery is focused on how a 
business can continue after a disaster has hit and how it can restore essential IT infrastructure.
Many different evaluation approaches are available, including cost–benefit analysis, the revised decision 
evaluation approach, and user involvement evaluations. The information system utility framework is a direct 
way to evaluate a new system based on the six utilities of possession, form, place, time, actualization, and goal.
Keywords and Phrases
Behavior-driven development (BDD)
behavioral security
bottom-up approach
client/server model
control flag (switch)
data couple
desk check
direct changeover
disaster preparedness
disaster recovery
distributed conversion
dual-factor authentication
email filtering products
encryption software
external auditor
firewall or firewall system
FOLKLORE
gradual or phased conversion
hub connectivity
information system utility
internal auditor
Internet of Things (IoT)
IS quality circle
link testing (string testing)
live data
local area network (LAN)
logical security
modular approach
modular conversion
network decomposition
network modeling
orchestration (as part of SOA)
organizational metaphors
parallel conversion
physical security
privacy policy
program testing 
public key infrastructure (PKI)
requirements traceability
Secure Sockets Layer/Transport Layer 
Security (SSL/TLS)
service-oriented architecture (SOA)
Six Sigma
storage area networks (SANs)
Storage as a Service (STaaS)
structure chart
structured walkthrough
test data
three-factor authentication
top-down design
total quality management (TQM)
two-factor authentication (2FA)
two-step verification
URL filtering products
virus protection software
web traffic analysis
wide area network (WAN)
wireless local area network (WLAN)
Review Questions
1. What are the three broad approaches available to a systems analyst for attaining quality in newly 
developed systems?
2. Who or what is the most important factor in establishing and evaluating the quality of information 
systems (IS) or decision support systems? Why?
3. Define the total quality management approach as it applies to the analysis and design of IS.
4. What is meant by the term Six Sigma?
5. What is an IS quality circle?
6. Define what is meant by doing a structured walkthrough. Who should be involved? When should 
structured walkthroughs be done?
7. List the advantages of taking a top-down approach to design.
8. Define modular design.
9. List four guidelines for correct modular programming.
10. Name the two types of arrows used in structure charts.


===== BOOK PAGE 536 =====

536    PART V  •  QUALITY ASSURANCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
11. What is service-oriented architecture?
12. Give two reasons that support the necessity of well-developed systems and software documentation.
13. In what four categories does the FOLKLORE documentation method collect information?
14. List six guidelines for choosing a design and documentation technique.
15. What is requirements traceability?
16. How is requirements traceability accomplished in the SDLC?
17. How is requiremenets traceability accomplished in the agile approach?
18. Whose primary responsibility is it to test computer programs?
19. What is the difference between test data and live data?
20. What are four advantages of using behavior-driven development?
21. What are the two types of systems auditors?
22. List the four approaches to system implementation.
23. Describe what is meant by a distributed system.
24. What is the client/server model?
25. Describe how a client is different from a user.
26. What is distributed computing?
27. What are the advantages of using a client/server approach?
28. What are the disadvantages of using a client/server approach?
29. Who should be trained to use the new or modified IS?
30. List the five possible sources of training for users of IS.
31. List the five conversion strategies for converting old IS to new ones.
32. List the nine organizational metaphors and the hypothesized success of each type of system given 
their presence.
33. Define the terms physical, logical, and behavioral security and give an example of each one that 
illustrates the differences among them.
34. What is two-factor authentication?
35. Define encryption software.
36. What is a firewall or firewall system?
37. List five of the measures an analyst can take to improve the security, privacy, and confidentiality of 
data, systems, networks, individuals, and organizations that use ecommerce web applications.
38. List five guidelines for designing a corporate privacy policy for ecommerce applications.
39. Name at least five devices that can be part of the Internet of Things (IoT).
40. What are five precautions the analyst can take to reduce the risk of cybercrime associated with IoT 
implementation?
41. Briefly describe the differences between disaster preparedness and disaster recovery.
42. What is STaaS?
43. List and describe the utilities of IS that can be used to evaluate the IS.
44. What are seven essential items that an analyst should include in performing a website  
traffic analysis?
Problems
1. One of your systems analysis team members has been discouraging user input on quality standards, 
arguing that because you are the experts, you are really the only ones who know what constitutes 
a quality system. In a paragraph, explain to your team member why getting user input is critical to 
system quality. Use an example.
2. Write a detailed table of contents for a procedure manual that explains to users how to log onto your 
school’s computer network, as well as the school’s network policies (who is an authorized user, and 
so on). Make sure the manual is written with the user in mind.
3. Your systems analysis team is close to completing a system for Azuka Theatre. Kevin is quite confident 
that the programs he has written for Azuka’s inventory system used for keeping track of stage scenery 
and props will perform as required because they are similar to programs he has done before. Your team 
has been very busy and would ideally like to begin full systems testing as soon as possible. Mark, 
Rebecca, Reva, and Quinn, four of your junior team members, have proposed the following:
a. Skip desk checking of the programs (because similar programs were checked in other 
installations; Kevin has agreed).
b. Do link testing with large amounts of data to prove that the system will work.
c. Do full systems testing with large amounts of live data to show that the system is working.
  Respond to each of the three steps in their proposed test schedule. Use a paragraph to explain your 
response.


===== BOOK PAGE 537 =====

CHAPTER 16  •  QUALITY  A SSURANCE  AND  IMPLEMENTATION      537
4. Propose a revised testing plan for Azuka Theatre (Problem 3). Break down your plan into a sequence 
of detailed steps and use a paragraph to write a memo justifying why the new plan is superior to the 
one Mark and the other junior team members proposed.
5. NJ Builders is a family-owned, medium-sized construction company doing residential and 
commercial construction and remodeling in New Jersey. Their field staff including their project 
consultant use iPads to take pictures and measurements of room dimensions on-site during the 
bidding process and also before-and-after pictures of any construction jobs they complete.  
The manager of field operations uses email and a mobile phone, as does her sister who is the 
president of the firm. Their offices, staffed by their brother who is the accountant and administrator, 
maintain two small networks at their two office locations, one at the shore and one in the New Jersey 
suburbs outside of Philadelphia. Sensitive consumer financial data as well as information on home 
security systems at residences and construction proposals and bids are maintained in a database.  
They are always up to date on the latest residential construction trends and feel their computer 
systems should reflect that too. They’ve heard a lot about cloud computing and would like to try it.
a. Prepare a list of factors they should consider in choosing cloud computing, along with a list of 
advantages and disadvantages.
b. In a paragraph, explain the difference between a private cloud and a public cloud.
c. In a paragraph, write a recommendation for upgrading the NJ Builders’ networks that includes 
moving to cloud computing and specifies whether a private, public, or hybrid cloud option would 
be the ideal one for them.
6. Draw a local area network or some other configuration of distributed processing using the client/
server approach to solve some of the data-sharing problems that Mariama Kah Architects, a top 
commercial architectural firm, is having. It wants to be able to allow teams of architects to work on 
blueprints at headquarters, let the construction supervisor enter last-minute changes to plans under 
construction from the field, and permit clients to view plans from almost anywhere. Currently, 
the company has a LAN for the architects who are in one city (Philadelphia) that lets them share 
some drawing tools and any updates team members make with architects in other cities (New 
York; V oorhees, New Jersey; Carmel, Indiana; and Vancouver, Washington). The supervisor uses a 
notebook computer, cannot make any changes, and is not connected to a database. Clients view plans 
on displays, but sales representatives are not able to enter modifications to show them what would 
happen if a wall were moved or a roof line altered. List the problems the company is encountering, 
analyze the symptoms, think of a solution, and then start drawing. (Hint: More than one network may 
be necessary, and not all problems will be amenable to a systems solution.)
7. Create a disaster recovery plan for one of the networks you recommended to Mariama Kah Architects 
in Problem 6.
8. Cramtrack, the regional commuter train system that runs between southern New Jersey and New York 
City’s Penn Station, is trying to train users of its newly installed computer system. For the users to 
get the proper training, the systems analysts involved with the project sent a memo to the heads of 
the four departments that include both primary and secondary users. The memo said in part, “Only 
people who feel as if they require training need to make reservations for off-site training; all others 
should learn the system as they work with it on the job.” Only three of a possible 42 users signed 
up. The analysts were satisfied that the memo effectively screened people who needed training from 
those who did not.
a. In a paragraph, explain how the systems analysts got off track in their approach to training.
b. Outline the steps you would take to ensure that the right people at Cramtrack are trained.
c. Suggest in a paragraph how the web and/or a new mobile app might be used to assist in training 
for Cramtrack.
9. A beautiful, full-color brochure arrived on Allen Johnston’s desk describing Shropshire Company’s 
off-site training program and facilities in glowing terms. It showed happy users at computers and 
professional-looking trainers leaning over them with concerned looks. Allen ran excitedly into Kim’s 
office and told her, “We’ve got to use these people. This place looks terrific!” Kim was not persuaded 
by the brochure but didn’t know what to say in defense of the on-site training for users she had 
already authorized.
a. In a few sentences, help Kim argue the usefulness of on-site training with in-house trainers in 
contrast to off-site training with externally hired trainers.
b. If Allen does decide on Shropshire Company’s training, what should he do to verify that this 
company is indeed the right place to train the company’s IS users? Make a list of actions he should 
take.
10. “Just a little longer . . . I want to be sure this is working correctly before I change over,” says 
Ebele, the owner of three bathroom accessories boutiques called Tub ’n Stuff. Her accountant, 
who helped her set up a new accounting IS, is desperately trying to persuade Ebele to change over


===== BOOK PAGE 538 =====

538    PART V  •  QUALITY ASSURANCE AND IMPLEMENTATION
completely to the new system. Ebele has insisted on running the old and new systems in parallel 
for an entire year.
a. Briefly describe the general problems involved in using a parallel conversion strategy for 
implementing a new IS.
b. In a paragraph, try to convince the owner of Tub ’n Stuff that a year of running a system in parallel 
is too long. Suggest a way to end Tub ’n Stuff’s dual systems that will provide enough reassurance 
to Ebele. (Assume that the new system is reliable.)
11. Draft a plan to perform web traffic analysis for the ecommerce application developed for Marathon 
Vitamin Shops. (See Consulting Opportunities 1.1, 13.2, and 14.5 for more information about the 
organization, their products, and their goals.) Your plan should take the form of a written report to  
the owner of the chain, Bill Berry. Be sure to indicate what statistics you will monitor and why they 
are important for Marathon Vitamin Shops to know.
12. Ayman’s Office Supplies Company recently had a new IS installed to help its managers, Omar, Julie, 
and Adam, with inventory. In speaking with the managers, you notice that they seem disgruntled with 
the system output, which is a series of displays that show current inventory, customer and supplier 
addresses, and so on. All screens need to be accessed through several special commands and the use 
of a password. The managers had several opinions about the system but had no systematic way to 
evaluate it.
a. Devise a checklist or form that helps Ayman’s managers evaluate the utilities of an IS.
b. Suggest a second way to evaluate the IS.
Group Projects
1. Ben Menk is the general manager for the world-famous Le Corked restaurant. His IS was developed 
over time by a small firm, Amanda Systems, and, as it exists now, consists of two computer systems 
that do not communicate with one another. One system handles reservations and maintains a data-
base of customers’ preferences (likes, dislikes, food allergies), birthdates, anniversaries, and other 
information. The other system, designed by Todd Fuller, Inc., assigns each party to a table on a given 
night. In your group, use a top-down approach to identify the modules that would be necessary to 
accomplish everything Ben wants to do using only one computer system, from making reservations 
to ordering food. From your own experience, determine what systems are necessary to operate a fine-
dining establishment, then describe the modules and how and when you would use them.
2. Divide your group into two subgroups and have one subgroup interview the members of the other 
subgroup about experiences they encountered registering for a class. Design questions to elicit infor-
mation on customs, tales, sayings, and art forms that will help document the registration process at 
your school.
3. Reunite your group to develop a web page for a short excerpt for a FOLKLORE manual that 
documents the process of registering for a class, one based on the FOLKLORE passed on in the 
interviews in Group Project 2. Remember to include examples of customs, tales, sayings, and 
art forms.
Selected Bibliography
Aten, J. (2019, December 9). The FBI is warning that your smart home devices aren’t secure. Here’s what 
you should do about it. Inc. https://www.inc.com/jason-aten/the-fbi-is-warning-that-your-smart-
home-devices-arent-secure-heres-what-you-should-do-about-it.html
Azad, M. H. (2011, Febraury 6). Say hello to behavior driven development part I. https://www.code 
project.com/Articles/148043/Say-Hello-To-Behavior-Driven-Development-BDD-Part
Evans, J. R., & Lindsay, W. M. (2015). An introduction to Six Sigma and process improvement (2nd ed.). 
Cengage Learning.
Hardware trends in 2022 and beyond. (n.d.). https://swzd.com/resources/
hardware-trends-in-2022-and-beyond/
Hecht, J. A. (2002). Business continuity management. Communications of the AIS, 8, Article 30.
Juran, J. M. (1964). Managerial breakthrough. McGraw-Hill.
Kannenberg, A., & Saiedian, H. (2009). Why software requirements traceability remains a challenge. 
Journal of Defense Software Engineering, 22, 14–19.
Kendall, K. E. (1980). Evaluation of a regional blood distribution information system. International 
Journal of Physical Distribution and Materials Management, 10(7), 457–466.
Kendall, J. E., & Kendall, K. E. (June 1993). Metaphors and methodologies: Living beyond the systems 
machine. MIS Quarterly, 17(2), 149–171.


===== BOOK PAGE 539 =====

CHAPTER 16  •  QUALITY  A SSURANCE  AND  IMPLEMENTATION      539
Kendall, K. E., Kendall, J. E., & Lee, K. C. (2005). Understanding disaster recovery planning through 
a theatre metaphor: Rehearsing for a show that might never open. Communications of AIS, 16, 
1001–1012.
Kendall, K. E., & Losee, R. (1986). Information system FOLKLORE: A new technique for system  
documentation. Information and Management, 10(2), 103–111.
Lübke, D. and van Lessen, T. (2016). Modeling test cases in BPMN for behavior-driven development. 
IEEE Software, 33 (5), 15–21.
McFarland, R. (2014). Information security basics: Fundamental reading for InfoSec including the CISSP , 
CISM, CCNA-Security certification exams (Kindle ed.). Amazon Digital Services.
Oetzel, M. C., & Spiekermann, S. (2013). A systematic methodology for privacy impact assessments: A 
design science approach. European Journal of Information Systems, 23, 126–150.
Robb, D. (2022, April 14). 5 storage area network (SAN) trends in 2022. https://www.enterprisestorage 
forum.com/networking/storage-area-network-trends/
Rosencrance, L., Loshin, P., & Cobb, M. (2021, July). What is two-factor authentication and why is it 
used? https://www.techtarget.com/searchsecurity/definition/two-factor-authentication
Sazzarin, A. (2021, August 4). 4 challenges for IoT implementation - and how to overcome them [Blog]. 
https://www.siemens-advanta.com/blog/IOT-challenges
Spies, A. (2021, August 24). Who is responsible for technical documentation during development. https://
workingmouse.com.au/way-of-working/
SSL.com Support Team (2021). SSL/TLS Best Practices for 2021. https://www.ssl.com/guide/ssl-best- 
practices/
Steele, B. A. (2019, December 3). Tech Tuesday: Internet of Things (IOT). https://www.fbi.gov/contact-us/
field-offices/portland/news/press-releases/tech-tuesday-internet-of-things-iot
Stephens, D. O. (2003). Protecting records in the face of chaos, calamity, and cataclysm. Information 
Management Journal, 37(1), 33–40.
Vigliarolo, B. (2021, November 4). 2022 will be the year of convergence between edge, IoT and 
networking tech, Forrester predicts. https://www.techrepublic.com/article/2022-will-be-the-year-of-
convergence-between-edge-iot-and-networking-tech-forrester-predicts/?
Warkentin, M., Moore, R. S., Bekkering, E., & Johnston, A. C. (2009). Analysis of systems development 
project risks: An integrative framework. DATA BASE for Advances in Information Systems, 40(2), 
8–21.
Wiegers, K. (2022). Requirements Traceability and Embedded Systems: A Key to Success. file:///Users/
iMacJulie/Dropbox/My%20Mac%20(iMac.fios-router.home)/Downloads/requirements-traceability-
and-embedded-systems.pdf
Zmud, R. W., & Cox, J. F. (1979). The implementation process: A change approach. MIS Quarterly, 3(2), 
35–44.

